
                               1 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words



International A2-9

U.S. BACKS LOANS FOR VIETNAM
The Clinton Administration has decided to drop its opposition to loans to
Vietnam from international lending institutions as a way of acknowledging
Vietnam's recent cooperation in accounting for Americans still missing in
Southeast Asia and to entice it to do more, Administration officials said.  A1

A HUMBLED EUROPE AT MEETING
Eighteen months after it plotted an ambitious future including a single currency
and joint foreign policy, the European Community will appear, humbled, at the
summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized nations in Tokyo next week.
A6



U.S. BACKS SUPPLIES FOR ANGOLA
Removing the last remnants of trade restrictions on Angola, the Clinton
Administration has cleared the way for sales of nonlethal military material to
the formerly Marxist Government of Jose Eduardo dos Santos.  A3

U.N. TO CUT BOSNIA RATIONS
The United Nations main refugee relief agency will reduce food rations to 1.8
million people in Bosnia for the next 10 weeks because of security problems and
a lack of donations, a United Nations spokesman said.  A3

DRAMATIC AZERBAIJAN COMEBACK
Heydar Aliyev, the former Communist boss of Azerbaijan and Politburo member in
the Soviet Union, consolidated a dramatic comeback by naming the republic's
dominant warlord as his Prime Minister and head of all internal and external
security forces.  A2

WHY CLINTON STOPPED A-TESTS
In deciding not to seek immediate Congressional approval to conduct more nuclear
tests, President Clinton appears to have been swayed by opposition from an
unexpected source: the Energy Department, which runs the national laboratories
that conduct the tests and have been their biggest proponents.  A8

U.S. IDEAS ON MIDEAST PEACE TALKS
In its boldest intervention in the 20-month Middle East peace negotiations, the
United States has offered its own ideas, suggesting that the Israelis and the
Palestinians move away from discussions of territorial jurisdiction in the
occupied territories and instead focus on government functions the Palestinians
could control, including health, education and police activities.  A8

British spies thwarted Iraqi arms sale.A8

Haitian talks enter a critical stage envoys say.  A9

Wuhan Journal: Young women in China study to become body guards.  A4

National A10-17

HOUSE CURBS ABORTION FINANCING
Anti-abortion forces won a major victory when the House voted to retain curbs on
Federal financing of abortions for poor women except in cases of rape, incest or
threats to the life of the mother.  A1

CLINTON APPROVES LOGGING PLAN
President Clinton has approved a plan to reduce logging on Federal lands, while
providing money to retrain loggers and help distressed timber communities.  A1

R-RATED TELEVISION PROGRAMS
News analysis: In agreeing to put warning labels on violent programs, the four
broadcast television networks made the smallest of concessions to Congressional
critics.  A1

DOUBTS ABOUT 'IVAN THE TERRIBLE'
A report concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Government's
assertion that John Demjanjuk, a retired Cleveland auto worker, was a sadistic
gas chamber operator in World War II.  A1

ANTI-GAY BILLS WIN LOCAL SUPPORT
Four counties and two towns in Oregon overwhelmingly approved measures opposing
legal protection for homosexuals.  A10

BIKING WITHOUT A BICYCLE
On Wheels: A bicycle odyssey across the country began inauspiciously, when
Amtrak lost the bike on the way to San Francisco.  A10

MIAMI TO PAY BEATING VICTIM
The City of Miami has agreed to pay $7.5 million and all the medical bills of a
black man whom police officers beat and then choked into a coma last year.  A10

AFTER A FOOD POISONING SCARE
Brianne Kiner was released from a Seattle hospital nearly six months after she
and 143 other people fell ill from contaminated hamburgers at Jack in the Box
restaurants.  A14

SEDATIVE TESTED AGAINST AIDS
Thalidomide, the sedative that has been banned in the United States since it was
found to cause birth defects, is being explored for use in AIDS and other
disorders.  A13

Civilian power plants were told to plan against terrorism.  A15

Life imitates movie? Extracting DNA from dinosaur cells.  A17

Metro Digest B1

CHANCELLOR SEARCH WIDENED
After a day of closed-door interviews with two of the three final candidates for
schools chancellor, the New York City Board of Education said that it was
reopening the search process in order to interview additional candidates to head
the system. A1

'STONEWALLED' AT EMPIRE
The chief auditor for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield told a Senate
subcommittee that she was "stonewalled" by Empire's chief financial officer and
his staff as she tried to investigate discrepancies.  A1 Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-9

For Southern architects, a soulful past to build upon.  C1

At home with Dave Barry: Regular guy on a laugh track.  C1

Total self-sufficiency plants? No, but these almost qualify.  C2

Where to Find It C2

Currents C3

Home Improvement C4

Garden Q. & A.  C4

Caldendar C7

Fashion: In Milan, bold visions and a softer silhouette.  C8

Parent & Child C9

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Martha Graham centenary.  C11

Holly Hunter's fame.  C11

Two museums name heads.  C11

Music: Bach Aria Group.  C12

Two saxophones, one effect.  C16

Dance: Dayton company.  C15

Books: The pros and cons of Prozac.  C15

Television: "Real World." C11

Sports B7-14

Baseball: Yanks beat Tigers, 7-0.  B7

Mets finally win their 2d in row.  B9

Orioles shut out Blue Jays.  B10

Basketball: Webber No. 1, but traded to Warriors.  B7

Column: Anderson on the Yankees.  B7

Football: Hartford tries to lure Patriots.  B10

Tennis: Sampras defeats Agassi.  B7

Obituaries D18-19

Zanvil A. Cohn, a biologist.  D19

John M. Todd, British writer of works on Wesley and Luther.  D19

Vincent P. Carosso, an expert on American business.  D19

Gloria E. Wise; led "Southern sit-in" in the 60's.  D19

Spanky McFarland, "Little Rascals" star.  D19

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

TV's sickos, shooters -- and kids.

The shrinking African giant.

Smiles of a summer night.

Mr. Stein quits.

Letters

Wole Soyinka: The Babangida watch.

Paul Auster: Thinking of Rushdie.

Philip C. Metzger: Politics and the high court.

Chronicle B4

Bridge C16

Crossword C12

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Will End U.S. Opposition To Vietnam Loans, Officials Say

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


The Clinton Administration is planning to drop its opposition to loans to
Vietnam by international lending institutions, Administration officials said
today.

The move would be a way of acknowledging Vietnam's recent cooperation in
accounting for Americans still missing in Southeast Asia and to encourage it to
do more, the officials added.

White House officials said the final details of the new policy, which are still
being hammered out, would probably be announced by President Clinton on Friday.

While dropping the lending ban falls short of ending the American economic
embargo against Vietnam, the step is likely to help pave the way for an opening
of trade with Hanoi in the near future.

It certainly would be the biggest easing of the trade embargo imposed by the
United States on Vietnam since the country was unified under Communist rule in
1975.

President Clinton will meet at the White House on Thursday with a coalition of
groups involved in the efforts to account for military personnel missing in
Southeast Asia to explain his thinking, hear their views and enlist their
support for the proposed move. These groups have given such proposals a mixed
reaction.

Incentives to Cooperate

The President will argue that when obstacles to international lending to Vietnam
are removed, Hanoi will have an even greater inducement to cooperate with
Washington in accounting for missing personnel, with the understanding that
further cooperation will probably lead to a lifting of the trade embargo.

The Administration is expected to tell Hanoi that it can move ahead now with
international loans and that its cooperation will be reviewed when the
Administration makes its annual reassessment of the trade embargo on Sept. 14.

"The key word is progress and not just cooperation," said a senior
Administration official. "Cooperation is just merely helping us out. What the
president is committed to is the fullest possible accounting. So lifting the
embargo is tied to tangible results."

To underscore the point, Mr. Clinton is expected to accompany announcement of
his new policy on the lending ban with a decision to send a senior official,
most likely Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia, to
Hanoi to press for further help on accounting for the missing.

Technically, what the Clinton Administration will be doing is lifting its
opposition to a French-led proposal to refinance Vietnam's $140 million debt to
the International Monetary Fund -- a move that will enable Hanoi to clear its
arrears, restructure its debt and attract further international financing.

Because Hanoi was in arrears on its I.M.F. debt, it was not able to secure much
larger loans from the World Bank and other international lending institutions to
underwrite the sort of major infrastructure projects it needs to make its
economy more competitive.

Administration officials said the draft announcement, which they cautioned was
subject to change between now and Friday, was the unanimous recommendation of
the inter-agency task force, headed by the National Security Council, that had
been charged with shaping policy on this issue. It included representatives from
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Treasury, the State Department and the Pentagon.

A Sensitive Issue

The emphasis that officials put on the unanimity of the recommendation
underscores how politically sensitive this issue is for Mr. Clinton, who avoided
the Vietnam war draft.

On this issue, Mr. Clinton finds himself caught between several pressures. From
one side, business groups are eager to make certain that American companies will
be able to get in on business opportunities in Vietnam.

Indeed, the changed policy on lending to Vietnam is bound to highlight the fact
that American companies are still barred from trading with Hanoi and will not be
able to bid on some of the huge infrastructure projects likely to be financed by
international banks there in the coming years.

But from another direction, the President knows he is vulnerable to complaints
from groups concerned about those still officially listed as missing in Vietnam.
These groups accuse the Hanoi Government of failing to reveal everything it
knows about those listed as missing.

At the same time, officials said, Mr. Clinton and his national security advisers
felt that to maintain Vietnam's cooperation in the search for information on
those listed as missing, they probably needed some symbolic way to acknowledge
that Hanoi has been providing a fuller accounting in some missing-persons cases
as well as better access by American investigators.

There are now roughly 90 so-called "discrepancy cases" in which there is
information that a person listed as missing was at one time alive in captivity
in Southeast Asia, but has still not been accounted for.

In the meantime, according to the Reuters news agency, one compromise idea being
considered by the Administration would keep the embargo in place for now but let
American companies carry out contracts financed by lenders like the World Bank
and the Asian Development Bank.

Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, Anthony Lake, has been meeting with
veterans' groups in recent weeks to sound them out on this change of policy.
Veterans' groups, together with politically powerful organizations of relatives
of those listed as missing, appear to be divided about ending the official
opposition to the I.M.F. loan restructuring, though clearly there are more
opponents than supporters.

"We believe that if you do this, the United States would lose all leverage for
negotiating with the Vietnamese," Dolores Alfond, head of the National Alliance
of Families for the Return of America's Missing Servicemen, said in an open
letter to Mr. Clinton this week.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 616 words



International

A Federal judge has ordered a study of the North American free trade agreement's
effects on the environment. The ruling could seriously hurt the treaty's
chances, and the Clinton Administration said immediately that it would appeal.
[D1.]

Japanese purchases of American-made auto parts are rising, but this is not
reducing the flow of auto parts Japan keeps shipping to the United States. The
experience suggests that setting numerical goals may not necessarily open doors
in Japan. [D1.]

The governor of China's central bank has been dismissed, a Beijing-backed
newspaper reported. Zhu Rongji, a deputy Prime Minister, will temporarily take
over as bank governor. [D3.]

The United States branded Japan as a nation that discriminates against the
American construction industry but said sanctions would be deferred for four
months. [D2.]

Italy's richest empires have deepening troubles. Fiat forecast soaring debt, and
the reigning heirs at Ferruzzi resigned. [D3.]

The European Community will slouch to the summit meeting in Tokyo next week,
humbled by a worsening recession. [A6.]

The Administration will drop opposition to loans to Vietnam from international
lending institutions, officials say. [A1.]

Companies

Westinghouse has chosen an outsider as chief executive and chairman: Michael H.
Jordan, who spent many years at Pepsico. Gary M. Clark, the acting chief, will
stay on as president. [D1.]

Volvo and Renault will borrow Japanese strategies to build large cars more
cheaply in their joint product operation. [D4.]

Hanson will buy Quantum Chemical in a $3.2 billion deal. Quantum's shares jumped
52 percent on the news. [D4.]

Ryder System intends to spin off its aviation-related division to shareholders
as a separate public company. [D4.]

General Instrument is paying off its debt early to Forstmann Little, in a deal
that has been spectacularly successful. [D4.]

Gillette has announced its newest shaving system, the Sensor Excel, which
features elastomeric fins and grips. [D4.]

A Japanese company claims to have an American patent on a new type of memory
chip that could become a huge seller. [D5.]

Clorox will sell its frozen-food business to Ore-Ida Foods Inc., a Heinz unit,
and will buy back about $100 million of its stock. [D5.]

Electronics companies will develop standards for VCR's that will use digital
technology to provide crisper pictures. [D9.]

The Economy

Orders from the nation's factories fell 1.4 percent in May, dropping to the
lowest level since November. [D2.]

Markets

Corporations issued a record $530 billion in stocks and bonds in the first six
months of 1993. The securities issued were 19 percent greater than the previous
record of $445 billion, set in 1992. [D6.]

The Dow Jones industrial average slipped 2.77, to 3,516.08, as almost all market
indicators showed only marginal changes. [D6.]

Companies are retiring zero-coupon convertible notes, which were popular in the
80's but now seem less attractive. [D14.]

Soybean futures soared amid heightened worries that heavy rain in key growing
regions could create a crop disaster. [D17.] The dollar moved higher against
major foreign currencies. [D17.]

Today's Columns

Palestine would be better prepared for economic autonomy than most new nations,
according to a report investigating its viability. Peter Passell: Economic
Scene. [D2.]

Sales are slipping at Vons, and Southern California's biggest supermarket is
seeking new ways to grow. Market Place. [D6.]

Young & Rubicam lured Ted Bell from Leo Burnett and named him its top creative
leader. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D18.]

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend;
Fleeing a Godfather's Hit Men? Try a Winnebago

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section D; Page 26; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 662 words


Network television seems eager to get on the road this summer. NBC has updated
"Route 66," and now CBS is jumping into a second-hand R.V. to wander around the
country in "Johnny Bago," Fridays at 10 P.M. Starring Peter Dobson ("Last Exit
to Brooklyn") in the title role, "Johnny Bago" is created by several of the
people -- the director Robert Zemeckis and the writers Peter S. Seaman and
Jeffrey Price -- who brought you the films "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" and "Back
to the Future." This time around, it looks as if they'll have to go back to the
drawing board.

Johnny Tenuti (Mr. Dobson) gets out of prison only to find that his former wife,
Beverly Florio (Rose Abdoo), is his parole officer. Further, Johnny is quickly
set up to take the rap for a mobster killing. He runs to his mom (Anna Berger),
who usually can be found sitting next to a statue of the Virgin Mary. Johnny:
"Ma, I didn't do it." Ma, proud of her boy: "Take the credit." On the list of
groups not likely to be overly amused by this heavy-handed parody, put
Italian-Americans at the top.

Fleeing a death contract put out by the local godfather, Don Roselli (Michael V.
Gazzo), Johnny hitches up with a wily codger (Dub Taylor) traipsing around the
burbs and byways of this country in his Winnebago, a product whose name provides
Johnny with his new alias. When the old man drops dead, Johnny inherits the R.V.
With assorted hit men and, inexplicably, the shrill Beverly in relentless
pursuit, dumb, gullible Johnny is off on a series of improbable adventures, all
the while dreaming of mama's tagliatelle alla bolognese.

The show's formula already feels as if it's set in frozen tiramisu. In one
episode coming up, Johnny ends up in Arizona with a gorgeous 17-year-old girl
("Lots of people are after me, mostly men"), whose age threatens to get him
slapped with a Mann Act prosecution. Along the way, they encounter a Vietnamese
war bride with a country twang worthy of Minnie Pearl. Meanwhile, Beverly,
charmed by a smooth-talking shoe salesman with a fail-safe recipe for salade
nicoise, ends up sipping Champagne from a slipper and having her body covered in
chocolate syrup and feathers. "Johnny Bago" is mightily determined to be offbeat
and eccentric. Fox's "Key West" does it better.

There are some neat touches. Mr. Dobson, a kind of young Martin Sheen with
spritzes of Tom Hanks, is consistently charming under sometimes trying
circumstances. And Johnny's episode-ending letters to Ma are dizzy gems.
Recalling how he used to spit-polish his mobster father's shoe, he reminds her
of Pop's advice: "Just don't get too good at the shoeshine business. I got big
things for you. You're going to be an extortionist." In America, evidently, some
ambition is better than none at all.


'A Capitol Fourth 1993'
PBS, Sunday at 8 P.M.
(Channel 13 in New York)

 Live from the Mall in Washington, this annual celebration has been on the air
for 13 years, and in 1992 it garnered the highest ratings ever for a
music-performance special on public television. With Erich Kunzel conducting the
National Symphony Orchestra, this year's lineup of performers includes Rita
Moreno, Johnny Cash, June Carter Cash, Mary-Chapin Carpenter and Peter Nero.
Musical selections will range from "Rhapsody in Blue" to "Yankee Doodle Dandy,"
from "Strike Up the Band" to "Stars and Stripes Forever." You want a traditional
Fourth? Go for it.

Johnny Bago
CBS, tonight at 10; also on Wednesdays at 11:30 P.M.
(In New York, Channel 2 at 11:35 P.M.)

Created by Robert Zemeckis, Peter S. Seaman and Jeffrey Price; produced by
Chicago 5 Productions and Papazian-Hirsch Entertainment in association with
Universal Television; Frank Marshall, Jeffrey Price, Peter S. Seaman, Steve
Starkey and Robert Zemeckis, executive producers.

Johnny Tenuti . . . Peter Dobson
Beverly Florio . . . Rose Abdoo
Hick . . . Dub Taylor
Ma Tenuti . . . Anna Berger
Don Roselli . . . Michael V. Gazzo

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 3, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

President Says U.S. Will End Opposition to Vietnam Loans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


The United States will end its opposition to international loans to Vietnam, but
the establishment of normal relations with Hanoi will depend on further progress
in accounting for Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War, President
Clinton announced today.

The President has decided on a two-pronged approach to allow the International
Monetary Fund to lend money to Vietnam, and at the same time to send a
delegation to Hanoi to press for more information about missing Americans.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 3, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Edward Dunlop, 85, Prison Camp Doctor

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 208 words

DATELINE: MELBOURNE, Australia, July 2


Sir Edward Dunlop, a former doctor in the Australian Army who was revered for
easing the suffering of prisoners of war forced by Japanese troops to build the
Burma-Thailand railroad in World War II, died today. He was 85.

A statement by the Alfred Hospital in Melbourne said the cause was a stroke,
preceded by pneumonia.

Sir Edward treated soldiers' wounds with homemade surgical implements and was
often beaten and threatened with execution for defending the rights of his men,
who were underfed and afflicted by a range of debilitating tropical diseases.

After the war, he worked to help returning prisoners and their families as well
as poor people in Asia, especially those in Thailand, Sri Lanka and Malaysia. He
also constantly called for good relations with postwar Japan, saying he bore no
malice against his former captors. In the late 1960's, Sir Edward also served as
an army surgeon in Vietnam.

"He was courageous, determined, humble and, above all, ever generous in helping
those who needed help," Prime Minister Paul Keating said.

A state funeral is planned for next week.

Sir Edward is survived by two sons, John and Alexander. His wife, Helen, whom he
married soon after the war, in 1945, died three years ago.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Oliver North's Next War

BYLINE: By Philip Weiss;  Philip Weiss is a contributing editor to Esquire.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5202 words


It was raining when Oliver North arrived at the Virginia state Republican
convention in Richmond last month. He went to a reception organized by the party
chairman and worked the room. He hugged one old friend and reached out with
sudden passion toward another, shouting throatily, "Hey, John!" He didn't drink.
He signed autographs and said "God love you" when people told him stories.

"I've taken this line from Schwarzenegger -- 'I'll be back,' " he said.

North meant next year's convention, when he is sure to return to seek the
party's nomination for the United States Senate. He wore the uniform of the
politician, brown wing tips with a dull shine, a pin-striped blue suit, a quiet
rep tie, but there is an electricity around North that even people who think
he's dangerous will never take away from him. Ollie North lets his supporters
share in that. He touches people a lot.

As North left the room, he stopped me in a corridor. I had been following him
around Virginia as much as his aides gave out his schedule, four visits in a
month, and he wanted to talk about the last stop, Roanoke, something that had
gotten back to him. I had mentioned to party activists there the fact that the
Iran-contra affair is played down at North's events. In introductions, for
instance, a speaker might refer to his role in "the rescue of American hostages
held in Beirut, Lebanon," and leave it at that.

"I don't want you to think I'm flippant about this," North said. "I made some
mistakes." He gave a little shake of his head. "And I've made a lot of mistakes,
being a frail, flawed human being."

We stood off to the side, and the space between us felt soldierly, six inches or
so, shoulders angled, North's voice lowered and solemn, drawing me closer. I
experienced the generosity his followers experience. The moment seemed intimate.
He lets you share in his manliness, lets you step into the Marine aura right
alongside him, the legend he's created.

"You know, in America we all learn how to choose between right and wrong, we
learn that growing up," he went on. "And we also get good at choosing between
good and better. Like when we buy a car, do I want a Ford or a Chevy? But how do
you choose between bad and worse? That's what I got loaded up with."

He turned his face toward me in what seemed complete openness. There's a sensual
quality about North, a raw physicality to his presence. His eyes are warm and
boyish, his mouth is open. You notice the slanting curve of his nose's bridge
where it was broken boxing. You see the gaps in his teeth.

A few feet away, North's staff began yelling at him that he had to leave, that
Betsy, his wife, would be mad if he didn't get going. North has trouble breaking
away.

Now he grinned. "I can take the criticism," he said. "Hey, brother, I was born
in Texas. The state bird is the armadillo!"

He winked and gave my arm a brotherly nudge with his elbow. As he moved out the
door, I felt the seductive thrill so many have felt in North's presence. It was
a few minutes before I could put what he had said together. So -- the
Iran-contra affair had been thrust on Ollie North. The man that the historians
of the episode agreed reached for greater and greater control, transforming
himself into a sort of underground Secretary of State, bossing around
ambassadors and generals, ever expanding a private government as he dreamed of
bringing Ronald Reagan a Nobel Prize for establishing a relationship with Iran,
the lieutenant colonel who the historian Theodore Draper wrote behaved in the
manner of a "junta," the zealot whose "whole spirit exploded," as one witness
described it, when he talked of the contras -- that man, Oliver North, had been
terribly put upon.

OLLIE NORTH HAS BEEN BARNSTORMING Virginia for two years or so, since the
special prosecutor, Lawrence Walsh, abandoned the case against him, ending a
nearly five-year ordeal. In 1989, Walsh had gained convictions on three felony
charges against North in Federal court: for obstructing Congress, destroying
documents and accepting an illegal gift (a security system). But the following
year, a Federal appeals court reversed one conviction and set aside the others,
saying that the prosecution may have been influenced by North's earlier
testimony before Congress, which was immunized.

Today, the typical North event is a rally for another Republican politician. Two
hundred people show up, maybe three hundred. North comes in joking. He comes
into a crowded Knights of Columbus hall outside Fredericksburg, a campaign
kick-off for Delegate William J. Howell of the Virginia General Assembly, and
stops sternly in front of two boys.

"Your mission" -- they stand up straight -- "is to find the head." Then he
breaks into a toothy smile.

Politicians all over Virginia now owe Ollie North in a big way. Parades,
$50-a-plate dinners, "photo opportunities" where people pay $30 to have their
picture taken with him -- North has been a tireless worker. "I think the key is
the desire people have to touch him, to be a part of an American hero," says one
of North's beneficiaries, Delegate Randy Forbes of Chesapeake.

More surprisingly, North has charmed segments of the party establishment and
Richmond society. When he addressed the Commonwealth Club last year, the crowd
couldn't squeeze into the ballroom so they had to bring him back a second time.
"He's not a sanctimonious bore," says Jack Clark, a club member and businessman.
"He looks you in the eye. He's absolutely sincere."

His most formidable political asset reaches well beyond Virginia -- his ability
to raise money among his national following as an us-against-them politician,
the lowly marine who stood up to Congress. His mailings (which have been
collected by People for the American Way) are filled with millenarian attacks on
the Democrats' "moral decadence." They are sometimes inflammatory. Openly
allowing homosexuals in the military will satisfy Bill Clinton's "radical
homosexual circles," but, one mailing argues, "increase the risk of AIDS,
hepatitis and other diseases that are prevalent in the homosexual community."
The letter closes with a request for a special contribution of $15 or $22. Mark
Merritt, North's political aide, points proudly to a Washington Post article
that says three of North's outfits, the Freedom Alliance, a personal legal
defense fund, now defunct, and V-PAC, took in more than $20 million over the
last five years from movement conservatives around the country.

Thanks to his speaking fees and the royalties from a best-selling autobiography,
"Under Fire," North is apparently a rich man. He has the aspect of a folk hero
but with a Virginian burnish. His columns in Freedom Alliance mailings go out on
a page with a picture of a quill and the legend "The President's Pen." He flies
everywhere in a leased plane and speaks casually of "my organization." His
diction is part 19th-century formality, part recovery-movement argot. Phrases
like "penned" and "an assassin's bullet" mingle with repeated references to his
wife as "my best friend."

Sometimes anger crowds through. Speaking of his escort on a recent trip to
Vietnam, North said one night, "The Communist party cadre that was taking us
around," and a few nights later, "The little Commie that was taking us around."
He has left the house we saw on television all through the Iran-contra crisis of
1986-87 and moved to a big old stone house back in the hills above the
Shenandoah River. The house is called (in an apparent reference to the fantasy
realm of C. S. Lewis novels) Narnia.

AT THE FREDERICKSBURG event, North mounts a low platform, covered with an
orangy-red carpet, to give his speech. Behind him is beige wooden paneling that
stops three feet short of the ceiling. Then there is a strip of oyster-white
wallpaper and a crucifix. North's speech is not very specific. He talks about
how the size of the national debt means that every American child now has a
$45,000 mortgage on his and her future without having a house to show for it.
His voice scrapes as he speaks; a vibrato comes into it as it goes into a low
register. He frees the mike from the podium with his left hand and takes up an
extra loop of the mike wire in his right so he can move smoothly about the
little stage.

"How does that relate to what Bill just said?" His voice hushes and grates.
"I'll tell you how it relates.  . . ."

When the speech is done, North's aides move to a counter. They upend cardboard
boxes, freeing copies of his book. A line forms to buy books and get North's
autograph, which he signs left-handed, vertically, almost Japanese style, the
felt-tip line moving away from his navel in a silken vector.

Later, there is a moment for the reporters. One asks whether North is running
for the Senate.

"Nineteen-ninety-four will come along in God's good time," North says. His
decision will turn on his wife's feelings. "My best friend and the mother of the
four children that the good Lord loaned us has been through an awful lot," he
says haltingly, "and she is going to have the first vote on that. If she says
no, then I'm not going to run."

But that very week, according to The Virginian-Pilot, North mailed a letter to
thousands of supporters saying he would run "if you and others like you are
willing to support me."

It is the sort of contradiction that infuses Oliver North's statements. There is
a lot of drama, but, beyond that, an inability to be straightforward about his
self-interest.

Once he did speak plainly to me about the Senate question. We were standing in a
crowded vomitory at the Republican convention, and I asked him why he was even
considering becoming a member of the Senate when he has regularly attacked the
"imperial Congress."

"You now have an imbalance of power in Washington," North replied. Term limits
would take care of that. "I think that what that deliberative body needs is new
blood, new blood that is not composed of professional politicians, people who
have experience in a broad range of American activities, like business."

"Do you want to be President?"

"Absolutely not," he said. "What I'm going to do . . . I'm looking at --" he
stopped himself.

Purple and white paper-punch confetti dotted his jacket shoulder and his hair
and he got his helpless expression, defenseless. "I have to be careful about
that, but I'm looking at two terms in the U.S. Senate, and then retire to play
with his children," he said, pointing at a handsome chunky kid, his son Stuart.

ACCORDING TO THE LITERATURE OF THE Iran-contra affair, Oliver North moved from a
military path to a political one in about 1984. He had come to the staff of the
National Security Council in 1981. Now his three-year tour was due to end with
his reassignment to the Marines. But North fought to stay. Though his spirit
required combat, politics was now what provided him with an undeclared war. This
attitude displeased the Marines. A decorated Vietnam veteran, he had gone
political.

Over the next two years, 1985 and 1986, North became the most powerful
lieutenant colonel in American history. His ascent ended in a constitutional
crisis. He learned he'd been fired from television, watching the November 1986
news conference at which Attorney General Edwin Meese revealed the most stunning
aspect of the affair, the "diversion" to the contras of profits from secret arms
sales to the Iranians. The diversion, which North had championed to his bosses,
was itself a diversion, drawing attention away from Iran-contra's central abuse
of power that was more threatening than Watergate: the creation of a shadow
secretariat channeling millions of dollars around the world in contempt of
Congressional oversight and public approval. Only Ronald Reagan's popularity
kept the case from wreaking Watergate's political damage.

There are two schools of thought on Ollie North: that he served as Reagan's de
facto deputy to help keep the plot from getting bogged down in the bureaucracy
or that he was a loose cannon his bosses couldn't contain. Given North's
shrewdness and willfulness, it's possible to buy both.

While denying knowledge of the diversion, Reagan gave support to the Iranian and
contra initiatives, but the Administration needed a man of action. Finding
obstacles at the State and Defense Departments and at the C.I.A., the White
House used the staff of the National Security Council. The mission-oriented
Ollie North had already done a masterful job in the spectacular midair capture
of the Achille Lauro hijackers. Now he threw himself into both the Iran and
contra affairs. He took on the responsibilities of others, set up a Swiss bank
account, charmed and lied to Congress, misled his superiors and at times even
went around the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Theodore Draper's highly
regarded history, "A Very Thin Line," says North was "infatuated" with notions
of his own superiority and "attempted and largely succeeded both in making
policy and in carrying it out." One grotesque example of North's overreaching
was the policy memorandum he drafted for a secret trip to Teheran. "We are
prepared to have whatever kind of relationship with Iran that Iran is prepared
to have with us," he wrote.

"Perilous Statecraft," an account of the affair written by Michael A. Ledeen, a
former National Security Council staffer, describes North as a "great talent and
a great risk," a creative man who needed greater supervision than he got and
easily overwhelmed the bureaucracy. The North of Ledeen's book is crazy like a
fox. He was "quite ruthless in using gossip and even deceit in defeating his
political opponents." In an interview, Ledeen goes on: "People have
underestimated North. It was always necessary for him to write the last memo.
He'd be there till 3 in the morning if he had to."

Howard Teicher, another former National Security Council staffer, echoes the
thought that North was a master of control. "When he looked at you with that
half smile and the twinkle in his eyes, that's when the wheels were really
turning," he says. "He could have gotten Barnum & Bailey's job."

The joint Congressional committee that conducted hearings on the Iran-contra
affair had underestimated North's talents. When North appeared on national
television before the committee in July 1987, he wore his Marine uniform, which
he had rarely worn while at the National Security Council, and portrayed himself
as a soldier who would take spears in the chest for his Commander in Chief. His
most brazen moment came when he defended his decision to accept a gift of a
$13,800 fence and security system from businessmen who were profiting on the
arms sales. He said the fence would prevent terrorists from getting to his
family.

"I want you to know that I'd be more than willing -- and if anybody else is
watching overseas, and I am sure they are -- I'll be glad to meet Abu Nidal on
equal terms anywhere in the world, O.K.?" he said.

The mixture North often presents of true believer and cagey self-server has led
some to question his balance. Draper's book details North's "reputation for
make-believe" and Ledeen's catalogues stories North told where it's clear he
"had a great deal of difficulty distinguishing between truth and fantasy."

Ledeen says: "He had an enormous capacity to believe his own stories. My
question is whether it was a temporary phenomenon, because he was so burdened,
or is it in his nature?"

AT AN OYSTER roast for a candidate in a walled community outside Williamsburg,
Ollie North opens with a laugh line. "I will treat you a little bit like Zsa Zsa
Gabor treated her fifth husband," he said. "She said to him, 'I won't keep you
long.' " The z's in Zsa Zsa come out like the z in zebra. How many 49-year-olds
don't know how to pronounce Zsa Zsa Gabor's name? It is a sign of how focused
Ollie North is, how little time he has for anything that is not on his vector.

These days, he is doing in Virginia what he did in Washington: applying himself
with tireless energy and cunning to a political system. Ambition is evident in
everything about him, in his tallowy complexion, in his support for candidates
who favor abortion rights though he opposes abortion, in the fact that minutes
after ending his speech at the oyster roast with a call for "men of character"
he returns to the microphone to say, "We need men and women of principle." His
Washington consultants have surely told North to tuck in his macho vibes. When
he tells an off-color joke in a men's room, he first drops to the floor to make
sure there's no one in a stall listening in on him.

After weeks in which his staff followed a policy that his political aide Mark
Merritt described as "not returning reporters' phone calls," North agreed to be
interviewed by me but the conversations were always hellbent. I was encouraged
to ask him questions only when he was on the march to somewhere. The questions
would end when we got to his destination or when his aides, who keep to a
schedule on military time, began hectoring us, saying Betsy was waiting. "Betsy
is going to wring my neck," Merritt would say. "Betsy is going to kill me." Once
you've met Betsy, and seen her and her husband together, this excuse appears a
little transparent. They are very affectionate with one another, but she seems
to have long since accepted that her husband is going to do his thing. Just the
same, the Betsy excuse is a mighty effective way of controlling encounters.

Up close you can see why North requires such constraints. Though he likes to
bash the news media in speeches, calling them the Washington Compost, the Nasty
Broadcasting System and the New York Crimes, he turns out to be more than a
little vulnerable face to face. Show him a little kindness and he goes along
with a wild-eyed helplessness. To many questions, he will throw out disarmingly
self-deprecating answers. "I may be crazy but I'm not stupid." "I'm a Cro-Magnon
man." North may not be very straightforward, but he is completely likable. You
want to call him Ollie.

As we entered the rear entrance of the Richmond Coliseum, the site of the
convention, I asked him where his ambition came from.

"When you see how each of our children has a $45,000 mortgage on their future,"
he began.

I interrupted. "I meant you personally."

He told me that his parents had brought up their children to follow the order of
Cincinnatus. "When the bugle sounds, we all have to contribute," he said.

But wasn't there something especially driven about him?

"We're all the products of the parents we have and the education we get and the
gifts the good Lord gave us," he said. "I can't take credit for any of it."

We had come to a dressing room, Star Room 1, under the stands. The door closed.

So that is the way North deals with his inner life. His phrasing about such
matters has a Moonie-ish sheen. Following his 22-day hospitalization for a
breakdown in 1974, North was taken under the wing of a Navy chaplain.  It was
then that he began to see his children as being "on loan" from God, he writes in
his book, and to see his wife as his best friend. Four years later, he had a
born-again experience. Recently I saw him throw his arms around a woman friend
one night in Winchester after she told him that her husband had died. "I guess
we'll be seeing Jimmy before long," he said, and they both wiped tears from
their eyes.

It was a moving moment. But how much of a real connection does North ever make
to people? If anyone was loyal to Ollie North, it was Fawn Hall, the secretary
and occasional model who seemed for a while to explore the femme-fatale role the
press assigned her, before finding it just wasn't in her: she was too square. As
the investigation of North began, Fawn Hall stuffed potentially incriminating
memos into her boots and the back of her shirt to remove them from the Old
Executive Office Building. Later, in Congressional testimony, she praised her
former boss to the sky.

This spring Hall was married in California. Many other Iran-contra figures were
there, among them Ledeen, the former National Security Adviser Robert C.
McFarlane and the former C.I.A. division chief Dewey Clarridge. North was
absent.

"Still to this day, he has never talked to Fawn," Ledeen says. "She did
everything for him and was most gratuitously slandered by the press. She kept
waiting for him to call. 'Can I help you out? How are you doing?' Loyalty means
not just loyalty up, but loyalty down. He did not show it to her."

Fawn Hall's mother, Wilma Hall, says she did not send a wedding invitation to
North. "There hasn't been any contact," she says. 'It didn't seem appropriate."

When we were walking around the Republican convention in Richmond, I asked North
why he never called Fawn Hall. His chin took on its heroic tilt. "I congratulate
her on her wedding," he said. "But I have seen very very few people [from that
period]. . . . Because I have taken the advice of my attorneys on it. Until
special prosecutor Walsh, or as I refer to him, special persecutor, goes away.
And that's the only reason."

But the question worked at him. He came back to me a minute later. "On that one
issue, one of the hardest things about this whole thing is taking that very
tough advice not to be in touch with people that I know and admire and have
respect for," he said.

"But you've been in touch with [retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V.] Secord."

"Only very briefly, and it was a chance encounter. And I have tried to raise
some money for Dick's defense."

It wasn't convincing. Secord told me later that he sees North "every few months
-- we're friendly." And North's business partner in Guardian Technologies, a
bulletproof-vest company, is Joseph Fernandez, a former C.I.A. station chief who
figured in the Iran-contra affair. I was left with the feeling that North -- who
ends most of his speeches with the cry, "Semper Fidelis!" and likes to say, "I'm
not a politician; I'm a businessman" -- is in denial about his political nature.
Fawn Hall was no longer useful to him, so he didn't stay in touch. Maybe it was
that simple.

ONE MEASURE OF OLLIE North's political acumen is the deference Republican
leaders show him, though he has never been elected dogcatcher. "He has that
stardom, that special effect on people," says Susan Allen, the wife of the
Republican candidate for Governor, George Allen. John Chichester, a ranking
Republican in the Virginia Senate, also has warm words for North: "He is well
reared and educated."

Asked what he thinks about the cloud of Iran-contra, Chichester says, "If you're
going to be against him, that's as good an excuse as any."

But in private, by some accounts, Chichester has urged others to step in and
block North's advance. (Chichester denies the allegation.) The Senator's tact
speaks to the dilemma that North presents to the Republican establishment. The
party is crippled by infighting. It has not won a statewide election, other than
for the United States Senate, in 16 years. North looks like a strong candidate,
and the Christian right is behind him. A leading Richmond Republican says that
coming out against North is like standing in front of a train.

"Can Virginia elect a young Jesse Helms? That's the challenge for Oliver North,"
says Robert D. Holsworth, chairman of the political science department at
Virginia Commonwealth University. "His election would represent the
steppingstone to national prominence as the spokesperson for ideological,
movement conservatism, a more in-your-face conservatism than Virginia is used
to."

Delegate Frank Wagner puts North's chances of becoming the Republican nominee at
80 percent. Wagner is one of few Republicans to speak openly against North (but
he pauses for several seconds -- "This is, as you know, thin ice," he says).

The incumbent Senator, Charles S. (Chuck) Robb, declined to discuss North. But
the state's wiliest politician, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder, who announced on June 24
that he would challenge Robb in the Senate primary next year, was willing to
venture an opinion during a phone interview.

"Americans like people who put their country first and are prepared to defend it
at all costs," Wilder said. "What has surprised me is that in this instance, the
country doesn't seem to have been put first and yet that glitter and glare is
still there."

"What was put first?"

Wilder chuckled. "The individual. The person involved."

THE GLITTER AND glare were on display at the Virginia state Republican
convention when Oliver North was hosted of a gathering after hours in Salon IV
in the Marriott. A large American flag was draped behind him; red, white and
blue balloons were everywhere. An endless line jammed the room, overwhelming the
air-conditioner.

"Too much organization," one man said, exiting.

"It's military," said his companion.

North's cadre of protectors, which included on this night a square-jawed marine
and a seven-foot former football lineman, directed the crowd so it flowed in one
loop and went out in another. They muttered into hand-held radios, imbuing the
room with an air of tension, but then Ollie North has been the target of an
assassination threat and his people seem aware that you cannot tap the dark
currents of political resentment without the risk that some nut will want to
respond. "Even paranoids have enemies," North had said to me.

They put a standup fan just under the flag in the kitchen doorway to suck the
hot air away from North, and now and then someone from the kitchen brought out a
fresh chocolate cake for the crowd. The cake was too sweet. Pieces lay on
plates, half eaten.

The neighboring salons at the Marriott were much less crowded. These were
meeting rooms for North's possible rivals for the Republican Senate nomination,
James C. Miller, the former Federal Budget Director, and Jay B. Stephens, the
former United States Attorney for the District of Columbia.

Stephens and Miller are Reagan alumni. Their senatorial explorations might be
seen as a symptom of the Reaganites' distress at the resurrection of Ollie
North. Last month, the generally conservative Reader's Digest ran an attack
titled "Does Oliver North Tell the Truth?" that quoted several former
Reaganites. When reporters asked North about it, he blamed the news media: "I'm
proud of the fact that I was able to work for Ronald Wilson Reagan, and they'll
never forgive me for it, and I'm glad."

It's more complicated than that. North always said he would be loyal to Reagan.
North is quoted as saying in 1986 that if a reckoning came he was willing to be
the scapegoat. He said he was prepared to go to jail for helping the contras.

But when the heat came down and Reagan disassociated himself from the scandal,
Oliver North protected himself. In his testimony before Congress, in his trial
in Federal court and in his book, he said he believed he was taking orders from
Reagan. At times, he exaggerated his access to the President (in trying to get
the Iranians to come to terms, he had invented a meeting at Camp David in which
Reagan revealed "his vision" to him). When Time excerpted North's book, the
headline on the cover was "Reagan Knew Everything." North's Oedipal turnabout on
Reagan is best understood by contrasting his conduct to that of another military
man, John M. Poindexter, the former National Security Adviser who pleaded guilty
to lying to Congressional investigators. To use the phrase the case brought into
the American language, Poindexter sought to give Reagan "plausible deniability."

Reagan is furious at North, one Virginia Republican told me, "because he
fingered him." Other establishment types echo this view, anonymously. There is
some feeling in Virginia that Reagan might actually step into the primary
process, say by writing a letter to Senator John W. Warner with warm comments
about North's rivals. A signal like that could damage North's efforts to reach
out beyond his hard-right base.

Why did North turn on Reagan? Ollie North might personify military values to the
public, but his self-mythologizing instinct tends to overwhelm any code. He's
like Tom Sawyer, whose hyper-imaginative antics almost cost Jim his life at the
end of "Huckleberry Finn." "I've been working on the great American novel for 25
years," North said at the convention. "It's in bits and pieces in four
footlockers." Ledeen says North wrote too much down when he was at the White
House, thereby violating a tenet of covert operations.

Indeed, when you read over Ollie North's Arabian-Nicaraguan nights, the big
suspense is how long before the cover gets blown. The operations were open
secrets in the Mideast and Central America; millions of leaflets were handed out
in Teheran describing the Great Satan's overtures. And when the story did come
out, Ollie North finally got to tell the world what he'd done for his commander.
With that, his middling career trajectory as a lieutenant colonel was forever
altered. It makes you wonder whether he didn't embark on his affair for the same
reason so many adulterous affairs are embarked on: the perpetrator wants to be
found out.

NORTH'S GATHERING WAS SUPPOSED to shut down at 11:30, but near midnight it was
still going great guns. Finally they shut the doors, only letting people out. It
was time to go. There was a SWAT-team feeling in the air, radio conversations
about a "clear route" to the car. Mark Merritt passed North a note: "We are
ready to start moving toward the door -- are you?"

The clear route meant avoiding the crowds in the hotel and going back under the
flag through the kitchen. I got to go along and lob some more questions at the
colonel. Betsy was there, too. We passed through the kitchen, down a passageway
and up a narrow staircase, through swinging doors with plastic wipeable shields
on the edges, along railings painted yellow to warn of danger from heavy
machinery.

I wanted to ask Ollie North about the famous Iran-contra hearings. He still
brimmed with resentment. "I've got the stripes to show for [the hearings]," he'd
said a week before. "And I'll never forgive them."

"But if they hadn't subpoenaed you," I said, "would you be here now?"

North's brow furrowed. "I don't know," he said. "I don't have the gift of
prophecy and I don't have the prescience to figure out what would have happened
if."

We had come out into an enclosed loading dock. It was dimly lit and had the
spooky look of a great American political scene-set. That is to say, it was
charged with all the drama about power and secrecy that Ollie North had carried
with him into public life. There was a black Cadillac backed into the loading
area, a late-model Fleetwood Brougham with whitewall tires. The doors were open,
the driver stood outside his door. Yellow light leaked in from the street lamps.
Betsy slid in the back seat and I had North another second.

"What I mean is, was there also an opportunity in that ordeal?"

North looked perplexed. His face got that childlike helpless expression. "Well,
I didn't see it as such," he said, laughing.

His aides shouted that he had to go. Their voices clattered in the darkened
chamber. Then he got into the car and they shut the doors.

NAME: Oliver North

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the televised hearings on the Iran-contra affair in 1987,
North wore his uniform. (Charles Steiner/J. B. Pictures); At the Virginia state
Republican convention last month, the uniform was gone but not the electricity.
(David Graham/Black Star for The New York Times)(pg. 12); North with
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, left, and James C. Miller, the former
Federal Budget Director and potential primary opponent, at the Virginia
Republican state convention. Signing copies of "Under Fire" at the convention,
with his wife, Betsy, at his side. (David Graham/Black Star for The New York
Times)(pg. 14); An ad for Guardian Technologies, the bulletproof-vest company
North owns with Joseph Fernandez, left. (Greg E. Mathieson/Mai)(pg. 15); A
family gathering for North outside his former home in Virginia. His wife, Betsy,
is third from left. Their children are Tait, second from left, Sarah, sixth from
left, Dornin, on fence, and Stuart, kneeling. A security man hovers in the
background. (Photograph by Greg E. Mathieson/Sygma)(pg. 34)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
The Cinematic Law Firm of Greedy, Vain & Immoral

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2050 words


Comfortably ensconced atop his class at Harvard Law School, sexy and clever and
cocky to boot, Mitch McDeere can go to any law firm he likes. Instead, seduced
by a bloated salary, a shiny new Mercedes, a plush office, the taste of Memphis
barbecue and a low-interest mortgage on a ranch house with a big backyard, he
opts for the ritzy but obscure firm of Bendini, Lambert & Locke.

Had McDeere, played by Tom Cruise, followed the well-trodden path from Ivy
League law school to a real-life law office like Hale & Dorr or Sullivan &
Cromwell, he would have quickly been forgotten. In nearly a century of cinema,
few film makers have seen movie material in these strait-laced, straitjacketed
operations. But in joining the Bendini firm, McDeere joined something else --
the ever-lengthier list of lawyers in American movies.

His venue is "The Firm," the new Sydney Pollack film based on John Grisham's
best-selling tale of a yuppie lawyer who finds that his place of employment is
actually a front for the Mafia. (Another Grisham novel about lawyers, "The
Pelican Brief," is in production in New Orleans with Julia Roberts and Denzel
Washington, and filming will start soon, once again in Memphis, on Mr. Grisham's
legal thriller "The Client.")

Something there is in the American psyche that is fascinated with lawyers, and,
not surprisingly, that fascination has frequently found its way onto film. But
if lawyers are a constant in American cinema, the character of those lawyers is
not. The heroic type immortalized a generation ago by Gregory Peck as Atticus
Finch in "To Kill a Mockingbird" has fallen victim to everything from the
anti-authoritarianism of the Vietnam era to the lawyer-infested world of
Watergate to America's diminished standing in the world economy (for which Dan
Quayle blamed the bar) to the growing ubiquitousness, and vulnerability, of
lawyers themselves.

As public perceptions of lawyers have changed, so, too has Hollywood's. Indeed,
film makers who once idealized lawyers have gleefully joined in the bar-bashing.
"What do you call 500 lawyers at the bottom of the ocean?" Danny DeVito asks one
of his clients in "The War of the Roses." "An excellent start," he says,
answering his own question. "I used to resent jokes like that," Mr. DeVito
continues. "Now, I see them as simple truths."

Attitudes like this explain why moviegoers, who once applauded lawyers
immortalized by Mr. Peck, James Stewart and Spencer Tracy, now cheer when a
Tyrannosaurus rex consumes a cowering lawyer in "Jurassic Park." It explains why
Mitch McDeere, foolish and greedy and arrogant as he is, passes as a hero. It
explains why California Lawyer magazine, in tracing the evolution of lawyer
characters, entitled the article "Atticus Doesn't Live Here Anymore."

It is not hard to understand why lawyers have long been a fit subject for film.
As professionals who often hover close to conflict, lawyers are rife with
dramatic possibilities; in them, film makers have always found neatly
encapsulated examples of nobility and corruption, cowardice and courage. For
every valiant lawyer (like Mr. Peck in "To Kill a Mockingbird") there is one who
is venal (Walter Matthau in "The Fortune Cookie") or vain (Ron Silver, the
ersatz Alan Dershowitz in "Reversal of Fortune") or incompetent (the nameless
defense lawyer in "Twelve Angry Men" whose sorry performance clears the way for
Henry Fonda's heroics) or ineffectual (Smithers in "Desk Set").

Americans not only admire and loathe their lawyers, they also like laughing at
them. Thus, we also find lawyers who are nitpicking or pompous, stuffy or nerdy.
All types have been as liberally represented on the tube as on the screen, most
particularly on "L.A. Law" but also on recent shows like "Matlock" "Law and
Order" "Civil Wars" and "Reasonable Doubts." And, as television's lawyers have
degenerated from Perry Mason to Arnie Becker, lawyers in movies have followed
suit.

For a time, movie lawyers were largely indistinguishable ethnically, religiously
and sexually. But, mirroring the changing demographics of the legal work force,
they have gradually been differentiated as Irish (Paul Newman in "The Verdict"),
Jewish (Kevin Pollack in "A Few Good Men") or women (Debra Winger in "Legal
Eagles," Glenn Close in "Jagged Edge," Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio in "Class
Action," Demi Moore in "A Few Good Men").

Black lawyers are less common, though in politically correct Hollywood these
days, they seem disproportionately represented on the bench. The bar is not only
more diverse but younger, with Tom Cruise (also in "A Few Good Men"), Michael
Douglas ("War of the Roses," "Fatal Attraction") and Harrison Ford ("Regarding
Harry," "Presumed Innocent") replacing Spencer Tracy ("Judgment at Nuremberg,"
"Inherit the Wind," "Adam's Rib") as the modern archetype.

Lawyer movies of all eras tend to follow certain conventions. For one thing,
they focus on trial lawyers who, though only a small percentage of the bar,
offer more vivid possibilities than antitrust lawyers or probate specialists.
They include plenty of law books, gavels, ceiling fans, hopelessly truncated and
oversimplified trials and surprise witnesses. Opposing counsel -- from George C.
Scott in "Anatomy of a Murder" to Joe Mantegna in "Body of Evidence" -- is
obnoxious, dishonest or incompetent.

Lawyers at large firms are caricatures from a New Yorker cartoon, smug and
porcine or downright sinister. The partners at "The Firm," most notably Oliver
Lambert (Hal Holbrook), are positively creepy to everyone but McDeere but no
more odious than Ed Concannon (James Mason), the high-priced lawyer battling
Frank Galvin (Paul Newman) in "The Verdict." Concannon was Hollywood's image of
a fat-cat corporate lawyer: elegant (usually denoted by a bow tie), coldblooded,
slightly British, assisted by droves of dronelike underlings who could have been
McDeere's Harvard classmates.

True, the movies have always had their share of bad lawyers. When Jack Benny
played a loutish lawyer in the otherwise forgettable 1943 film "The Meanest Man
in the World," five Connecticut lawyers sued. "There's got to be a law, even for
lawyers!" Lana Turner tells Hume Cronyn, who is playing her attorney in "The
Postman Always Rings Twice." In "Adam's Rib," the man living across the hall
from the husband-and-wife legal team of Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn made
the same point more amicably. "Lawyers should never marry other lawyers," he
declares. "This is called inbreeding, from which comes idiot children and more
lawyers." "You lawyers are all the same," one reluctant witness tells Mr. Newman
in "The Verdict." "You don't care who you hurt as long as you make a buck.
You're a bunch of whores."

But if America has always had a love-hate relationship with its lawyers, the
focus, for a time, was on love. In "The Fortune Cookie," Walter Matthau may give
short shrift to Lincoln as legal counsel -- "Great President, lousy lawyer," he
huffs -- but in many of the finest lawyer movies, the heroes had a Lincolnesque
cast: noble, earnest, handsome, plain-spoken, impeccably ethical. They are
exemplified by Atticus Finch in "To Kill a Mockingbird" and Paul Biegler, played
by James Stewart, in "Anatomy of a Murder." Both love the law so much they don't
care if they're paid in collard greens or hickory nuts or not at all. Both
represented the unpopular, and both were effective. Biegler got his client off,
even though he was probably guilty; Finch lost, but only because he had to
battle three centuries of Southern racism.

Both "To Kill a Mockingbird" and "Anatomy of a Murder" date from the late 1950's
to the mid-1960's -- the golden age of the genre, as Thomas J. Harris notes in
his book "Courtroom's Finest Hour in American Cinema." Such classics as "Witness
for the Prosecution," "Compulsion," "Inherit the Wind," "Cape Fear" and
"Judgment at Nuremberg" also appeared. Another film buff, Anthony Chase of the
Nova Law Center in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., has explained this efflorescence: The
crusading, idealistic lawyer, he contends, was a delayed reaction to the loss of
civil liberties during McCarthyism.

Of course, the view of lawyers in these films was hopelessly naive. The
lawyer-heroes of yore would no longer sell, and film makers stopped peddling
them. Nothing better illustrates the change than the two versions of "Cape
Fear," made 30 years apart. In the 1961 edition, Sam Bowden, the lawyer played
by Mr. Peck, embodies all the usual virtues. He is Atticus Finch without Jem and
Scout. But in Martin Scorsese's 1991 remake, Bowden, now played by Nick Nolte,
is unfaithful, unethical and unsympathetic. As if to underline the point, the
now-aged Peck once more portrays a lawyer -- this time, a slick, sanctimonious
windbag.

Recent films have offered more subtle, complex figures like Mr. Newman's
character in "The Verdict," perhaps the most convincing lawyer ever portrayed on
film. Lesser examples include Glenn Close in "Jagged Edge" and Willem Dafoe in
"Body of Evidence" -- dedicated defense lawyers with an unfortunate propensity
to sleep with their sexy clients.

Ron Silver's Alan Dershowitz does not go to bed with Jeremy Iron's Claus von
Bulow or commit any other ethical faux pas. "I gotta feel there's some moral or
constitutional issue at stake," he says in "Reversal of Fortune." But in his
film incarnation, Mr. Dershowitz comes across as arrogant, self-righteous, angry
and perpetually overcaffeinated -- due, no doubt, to the coffee mug he nurses in
almost every scene. He may be a great lawyer, but he is not a mensch.

Characters like McDeere represent a new wave of lawyer characters, children of
the Reagan era, the first generation of young lawyers to be fought over by
megafirms promising buckets of money. These lawyers are better educated than
their predecessors; both McDeere and Michael Douglas's Oliver Rose in "War of
the Roses" went to Harvard Law School. They have forsaken the country for the
city, the perilous life of the single practitioner for large hierarchical
enterprises, three-piece suits for suspenders and power collars, poor clients
for wealthy ones, simple honest pleasures for amoral materialism.

For them, the law is less a calling than a fast track to affluence, and we don't
see them practicing much of it. They spend less time in court than they do
flattering senior partners or huddled over law books and yellow legal pads,
working on matters of little interest to them and even less to moviegoers. Of
much greater interest is the toll their work takes on them and their families.

Oliver Rose does not cheat on his wife in "War of the Roses," but given his
workaholism, his obsequiousness to clients and superiors, his self-centeredness
and soullessness, his marriage founders anyway. "My fee's going up!" he chortles
to his long-suffering wife, played by Kathleen Turner, after landing a new
client. "Better get me while you can afford me!" So repulsive does he become
that when he is hospitalized with what he thinks is a heart attack -- in fact,
it is a hernia, suffered while further flattering the coveted client -- she does
not bother seeing him. "When I watch you eat, when I see you asleep, when I look
at you recently, I just want to smash your face in," Ms. Turner later tells him.
And things go downhill from there.

Mitch McDeere's wife, played by Jean Tripplehorn, has nearly as many grievances,
and in much shorter a time. Though she is a mere schoolteacher rather than a cum
laude graduate of Harvard Law School, she instantly senses that something is
wrong with a law firm that monitors its lawyers' marriages and encourages them
to procreate. "I don't mind square," she says. "Weird, I mind." But sucked in by
the wages, McDeere pours himself into the firm, leaving his wife to cook meals
for herself. The plot allows him to muster whatever courage and character he
possesses simply to dig himself out of the hole his greed landed him in.

These are lawyer movies only because their characters happen to be lawyers. But
as vehicles for demonstrating the hollowness of the 1980's, Mitch McDeere and
Oliver Rose need not have been lawyers at all. Charlie Sheen's Bud Fox did it
just as well in "Wall Street," and he, for one, didn't have a law degree.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Cruise as Mitch McDeere in "The Firm" -- A yuppie lawyer who
sells his soul to a corrupt firm in exchange for a house and good pay. (Francois
Duhamel/Paramount Pictures)(pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Buck Stopped Here. Briefly.

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


THERE'S nothing like an impending summit to get a President to clear his desk.
Bombing Iraq's intelligence headquarters last week was the first of a series of
rapid-fire decisions on long-simmering issues, from the fate of Northwestern
forests to the future of American ties with Vietnam. Documents signed "William
Jefferson Clinton" seemed to be sailing out of the Presidential OUT box as he
prepared to fly off to Tokyo for his first economic summit. If there was a
closing line to the week, it would be: "I'm outta here, folks.  Al, you mind
handling the complaints?"

Journalists are in a quandary. It's hard to know where the most interesting seat
will be next week. Will it be in Tokyo, where leaders of the seven major
industrialized democracies are gathering, and Japan and the United States are
expected to clash over trade issues? [Articles, page 2.]

All of them are suffering in the popularity polls and the host, Kiichi Miyazawa,
is referred to in his native tongue as "dead body" -- Japanese for lame duck.
(For the first time ever, the most popular leader at the summit could be Boris
N. Yeltsin.)

Or will it be in Washington, where different constituencies will be lining up
with torches and pitchforks for their chance to ransack the White House after
the decisions Mr. Clinton made?

White House officials argued that the last week showed a President who was
stepping up to the plate on tough issues. True enough. But isn't that his job?

Never mind. For anyone who might have missed a few pitches, let's go to the
videotape:

President Clinton approved a plan by an independent commission that would close
dozens of military bases.

He managed to alienate both environmentalists and loggers by offering a plan
that would protect the northern spotted owl by dramatically reducing Northwest
logging, but would also offer $1.2 billion to retrain loggers and help timber
towns, and would cut incentives to ship mill jobs overseas.

He told aides he would throw his support behind a recommendation that
homosexuals join the armed forces under a policy in which the military would not
ask recruits about their sexual orientation but would retain the ability to
throw out homosexuals who make ostentatious public statements about their
preferences. This one is so explosive, though, that it needs more work before it
can be unveiled.

In between, the President decided to drop American opposition to international
loans to Vietnam.

By Friday, reporters found so many angry faxes coming in that it was hard to
keep the interest groups straight. The joke going around the White House, one
official said, was: "Is that gay Vietnam vet logger who wants to keep his base
open still out there on the lawn?"

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The 43% President

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley;  Alan Brinkley is a professor of American history at
Columbia University. He is the author, most recently, of "The Unfinished Nation:
A Concise History of the American People."

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1741 words


BILL CLINTON'S political fortunes have fluctuated as wildly and rapidly as those
of any President in recent history. In the 1992 Presidential campaign, he seemed
one of the most impressive politicians of his time. By the end of his first four
months in office, he was being widely dismissed as an inept and rudderless
leader. Now, after weeks of careful repositioning, he appears slowly to be
regaining the public's ear. How do we explain such radical swings in public
perception? Is the President himself responsible for the roller-coaster-like
character of his Presidency so far? Or has he been the victim -- and at times
beneficiary -- of events beyond his control?

The new Administration has, to be sure, made its share of early mistakes. But
the speed with which many of them seem to have been forgotten suggests that they
received more attention than they deserved -- and more attention than the
similar early missteps of most of Clinton's predecessors. What has made the
President's first months so rocky has been less his own performance, which
includes real achievements as well as failures, than the character of the
contemporary political environment.

Perhaps no President of the 20th century has entered office facing a more
difficult combination of pressures. On the one hand, Clinton carries an
exceptional burden of diverse and incompatible expectations. He is the first
Democratic President in a dozen years, the first President since Lyndon Johnson
committed to a significant expansion of Government's social and economic
responsibilities. Liberal Democrats have greeted him with a rapture born of 12
(many would say 25) years in the political wilderness. African Americans,
feminists, gay men and lesbians, environmentalists, intellectuals and artists
and many other groups who considered the Reagan and Bush Administrations their
enemy expect something close to a millennial change now that a sympathetic
Democrat is in office. Centrist and conservative Democrats expect Clinton to
rescue the party from its liberal wing and recast it in their own image.

Virtually everyone expects solutions to the problems of the economy, health
care, the welfare system and many other troubled areas of American life; but
there is no consensus, even among Democrats, on what those solutions should be
-- or even on whether any solutions are available. Clinton may have increased
the burden of these contradictory expectations with his lavish campaign promises
and his well-known eagerness to please everyone. But there is no way he could
have escaped it altogether.

At the same time, Clinton has entered office with extraordinary political
weaknesses, which have made it almost inevitable that he will fail at much of
what he set out to do. He was elected with 43 percent of the popular vote, the
smallest winning percentage in 80 years -- a frail mandate indeed for the bold
programs he has promised. In the absence of the cold war, there are no evident
foreign policy issues around which he can easily rally popular support and
derive political strength -- as his abortive Bosnia initiative demonstrated. He
must, instead, fight it out on the domestic front, where consensus is much more
difficult to create.

That means, among other things, fighting it out with Congress, which does not
seem to be in a cooperative mood. Clinton has encountered an unusually
implacable Republican opposition. His economic program attracted not a single
Republican vote in the House. Senate Republicans unanimously supported the
filibuster that killed Clinton's modest economic stimulus package. Bob Dole now
talks of the filibuster as if it were a normal tool of minority party
opposition, and he has made it clear that he plans to use it often. In fact, a
filibuster orchestrated by party leadership (as opposed to mavericks or regional
minorities) is virtually unprecedented.

Without any likely Republican support on the most important elements of his
agenda, Clinton must rely on virtual unanimity among Congressional Democrats,
who are themselves deeply divided. The Democratic majorities in both houses are
small and -- in the Senate -- diminishing. Members with moderate to conservative
views hold the balance of power, as the President's excruciatingly narrow Senate
victory on his budget bill last month makes clear. Nor can Clinton expect much
help from his party's Congressional leaders, who are so accustomed to being in
opposition that they seem to have lost the will -- and the means -- to help him
succeed. Clinton's much-vaunted "move to the center" is not, in other words,
simply a public relations gambit. It is at least in part a recognition of the
realities of Congressional politics.

There is a larger obstacle to Clinton's hopes as well: the legacy of nearly
three decades of social, economic and ideological disappointment, a legacy of
political frustration and popular cynicism symbolized for the moment by the
irritatingly persistent popularity of Ross Perot. The last liberal President
with an activist agenda comparable to Clinton's was Lyndon Johnson, who entered
office before the height of the Vietnam War, before the racial climate soured,
before Watergate, before the energy crisis, before the erosion of the economy --
before all the events that have left the public and -- of more immediate
importance, perhaps -- the news media with a skeptical, adversarial view of
politics in general and the Presidency in particular. That Clinton is himself a
representative of the "60's generation," the generation most decisively affected
by these events (and the generation currently dominating the media), has
exaggerated both the expectations he has generated and the disappointment he
creates when he seems not to fulfill them.

Mistakes and miscalculations that would have attracted little attention 30 years
ago -- the travel office imbroglio, the California haircut, even the Lani
Guinier embarrassment -- now become major issues, seized upon by journalists as
evidence of Clinton's indecisiveness. One can understand the frustration among
those in the White House who see what they consider their most important
initiatives consistently obscured by fleeting controversies. But while the news
media are certainly to blame for some of the President's political problems,
they did not create and cannot alone dispel the popular cynicism that is their
real basis. Clinton's complaining about the nature of the press in this
skeptical, post-modern age is, as Fred Barnes wrote recently in The New
Republic, "like someone complaining about the weather. He's railing against the
way the world works."

Many of Clinton's admirers hoped and expected that he would become a domestic
dynamo who would break through the gridlock and fulfill the dreams of a
generation. He would be a Franklin D. Roosevelt or a Lyndon Johnson, the kind of
President the political scientist Clinton Rossiter celebrated nearly 40 years
ago in his book "The American Presidency" as "a kind of magnificent lion, who
can roam freely and do great deeds so long as he does not try to break loose
from his broad reservation. . . . There is virtually no limit to what the
President can do if he does it for democratic ends and through democratic
means."

But the political world in which Clinton must live has very little in common
with those F.D.R. and L.B.J. inhabited. A more appropriate analogy for this
President would be Harry Truman, whose tenuous popularity and fragile (or
nonexistent) Democratic majorities in Congress frustrated almost all his
important domestic initiatives; or John F. Kennedy, who like Clinton received
less than 50 percent of the vote in 1960, who like Clinton had no reliable
Congressional majorities and who through most of his brief Presidency had
consistently to trim or abandon his most expansive domestic goals. Clinton may,
in other words, face the kind of world that the British writer Godfrey Hodgson
described in his 1980 book "All Things to All Men: The False Promise of the
Modern American Presidency" when he wrote: "Never has any one office had so much
power as the President of the United States possesses. Never has so powerful a
leader been so impotent to do what he wants to do, what he is pledged to do,
what he is expected to do and what he knows he must do."

Great Presidents are products not just of their own talents and ambitions, but
of the circumstances they inherit. Theodore Roosevelt complained frequently that
his times had denied him the greatness to which he aspired and of which he
considered himself capable. "A man has to take advantage of his opportunities,"
he said in 1910 after leaving office, "but the opportunities have to come. If
there is not the war, you don't get the great general; if there is not the great
occasion, you don't get the great statesman; if Lincoln had lived in times of
peace, no one would know his name now." The great disappointment of Roosevelt's
life was that World War I came after he had left office, that, as he saw it,
Woodrow Wilson and not he had the real opportunity for greatness.

Bill Clinton may some day have a similar lament, not presumably about the
absence of a war but about the absence of great political opportunities. And yet
Presidents also have at least some capacity to change the circumstances in which
they govern -- to alter the public conversation to permit discussion of ideas
that were once impermissible, to build a mandate where none exists, to persuade
wavering legislators (and wavering voters) that small steps forward are better
than none -- and that small steps now can lead to bigger ones later on. That was
one of Theodore Roosevelt's most important achievements, even if it was one he
did not himself always fully recognize; it was also, in the end, the principal
legacy of John F. Kennedy. It is an opportunity that remains open to President
Clinton. He probably cannot do all he and his most exuberant supporters had
hoped. But if he manages to restore at least some realism to national fiscal
policy (as he has already begun to do), to construct even a modest program of
national health insurance and to revive a modicum of popular confidence in the
ability of Government to perform, he will deserve credit for some historic
achievements.

To succeed, he will need to adjust to things as they are without giving up
patient efforts to change them. He will also need those who wish him well to
give him a chance.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Security Official Guides U.S. Aims at Conference

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1516 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


Every Wednesday, three men gather around the conference table in a spacious
corner office in the West Wing of the White House to share sandwiches and talk.
Their conversation is anything but casual, for they are the backbone of
President Clinton's foreign policy team.

W. Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, Les Aspin, the
Secretary of Defense, and Warren Christopher, the Secretary of State, are the
people who have drafted the President's speeches and policy statements as Mr.
Clinton prepares to go to Tokyo this week to meet with the leaders of the
world's wealthiest nations. They have spent weeks in close negotiations with
representatives from the other countries, trying to resolve differences over
economic policies and aid to Russia.

Mr. Lake will be at the President's side as he travels to Tokyo for his most
extensive foray to date on the world stage. And when the leaders of the
so-called Group of Seven issue their communiques in Tokyo, much of the direction
will have been determined in advance by Mr. Lake and a staff of strategists and
technocrats.

The advisers place a premium on collegiality, secrecy, efficiency and finding a
Clinton-like consensus on every issue. In planning for the economic conference
in Tokyo, Treasury Secretary Lloyd M. Bentsen has also taken part, as have
Robert E. Rubin, the head of the new National Economic Council, and his deputy,
W. Bowman Cutter.

Lake Spearheads Asia Trip

But because Mr. Rubin has a significantly smaller staff and a mandate that
focuses on domestic issues, Mr. Lake's shop has driven much of the preparations
for the Asia trip.

"As we look at this week, we have a new President going to Asia -- a new Asia.
It really becomes increasingly clear that we ought to use this as an opportunity
to talk more broadly about the United States as a Pacific power and the emerging
economic and security relationships with the United States and Asia," said a
national security official, who insisted on anonymity.

The summit meeting will inevitably push Mr. Lake closer to the public view. But
the national security adviser and his own team, members of the White House
national security staff, generally leave the public stage to Cabinet members
like Mr. Aspin and Mr. Christopher, in part to avoid the sort of turf warfare
that has often marred foreign-policy making.

"I really wanted to avoid becoming the guard-all shield between the President
and the rest of the foreign policy community, but at the same time make sure he
wasn't being buried in all kinds of different memos and meetings," Mr. Lake said
in an interview. "That's not what the President wants in any case."

The feuds between William P. Rogers and Henry A. Kissinger under Richard Nixon,
and Zbigniew Brzezinski and Cyrus R. Vance under Jimmy Carter are now remembered
almost as much as the achievements. Even James A. Baker 3d and Brent Scowcroft,
who worked as Secretary of State and national security adviser for George Bush,
had their tense moments.

Determined to Avoid Tension

"I think Tony and I and Les are determined that we'll not have a repeat of the
tensions that existed in previous administrations," said Mr. Christopher, who
worked with Mr. Lake at the State Department during the Carter years.

"If that falls apart," another adviser added, "you get the Vance-Brzezinski, the
Kissinger-Rogers vehemence, and everybody loses."

Some of Mr. Lake's supporters, concerned that like some of his predecessors he
is ceding the political credit for American policy advances to Mr. Christopher,
have begun quietly campaigning to raise his visibility just a bit.  But Mr. Lake
has generally eschewed television and most other opportunities to publicize his
role.

"The more you do, especially in a job like this, outside, the more the others
are going to start feel you're threatening them," said a White House official.
"And it actually diminishes your power, and it actually undercuts the
President."

Mixed View on Growing Pains

When the national security advisers boast at all, it is to point out that -- in
their view, at least -- the President's foreign policy operation has suffered
few of the growing pains that have occurred on the domestic and communications
side of the White House.

This ignores the Administration's biggest foreign policy stumble to date, its
abortive effort to force allied action in Bosnia. Mr. Lake, officials concede,
has been at the center of that crisis as well.

And critics say the foreign policy brain trust also mirrors some of Mr.
Clinton's own weaknesses. To some members of Congress and people in the foreign
policy community, the collegiality of the President's advisers comes across as
mushiness, their secrecy as stubbornness and their passion for efficiency as a
maddening inability to see the forest for the trees.

Praise and Criticism for Lake

Mr. Lake is the most frequent target for both the praise and the complaints that
emerge about the President's foreign policy office. Low-key, bespectacled and
possessed of a dry wit, he does not fit the mold of previous national security
advisers, most of whom have been drawn from the military. A career Foreign
Service officer who served in Vietnam and later opposed the war, Mr. Lake's
appearance suggests an academic background and he has indeed been a professor at
Mount Holyoke College.

The White House foreign policy team is so circumspect that even members of
Congress with security clearance have trouble forming opinions about its
efficiency.

"I suspect he's very much overworked," Representative Lee Hamilton, the Indiana
Democrat who is the chairman of the House Foreign Relations Committee, said of
Mr. Lake. "That means it's tough for him to get to an issue unless it's urgent."

Harsher critics suggest that the President's foreign policy advisers are too
reactive and have not taken on enough of an advocacy role.

"I'm being careful," said Representative Dave McCurdy, a Democrat from Oklahoma
and member of the Armed Services Committee, who was asked to assess the early
work of the President's policy advisers. "A lot of it depends on State and
Defense and how forceful they are in the kinds of roles they hold."

'A Very Low-Key Manager'

Of Mr. Lake, he added: "I haven't figured out what kind of role he has. If he's
a manager, he's a very low-key manager."

But Mr. Lake's low profile has cost him in credibility in a political
environment where invisibility is often equated with powerlessness.

"What I think they miss is his toughness," said George Stephanopoulos, a senior
adviser to the President. "I think it's too easy to think: Vietnam, professor,
laid-back and funny equals not tough. And that's just flat-out wrong."

Administration officials said that before last weekend's missile strike against
Iraq, Mr. Lake urged the President to take aggressive action after concluding
that Iraq was responsible for hatching an assassination plot aimed at President
Bush. Mr. Lake's handprints, they said, were also to be found in Mr. Clinton's
aggressive defense of aid for Russia before and since the Vancouver summit
meeting.

The downside of that analysis, of course, is that Mr. Lake has also been central
in forming the failed Administration policy on Bosnia. Mr. Clinton's oratory
seemed muscular during the election campaign, but Washington's policy has
appeared feckless after European allies rejected Mr. Christopher's pitch to lift
the arms embargo on the Bosnian Muslims and consider limited air strikes against
Serbian nationalists.

But if it is true that Mr. Lake is the man at Mr. Clinton's elbow when it comes
to setting foreign policy, what of Warren Christopher, the courtly Secretary of
State?

Although he insists he is not a gatekeeper, Mr. Lake has designed a system that
makes him the hub of the wheel.

More Than One Voice

"The principal spokesman for foreign policy should be the Secretary of State,"
one White House official said. "It gets confusing when there is more than one
voice out there. But there's no question who's driving foreign policy in terms
of the decision-making process." That would be Mr. Lake.

"There's more than enough room," Mr. Christopher said in an interview. "A
properly functioning national security adviser only enhances the position of the
Secretary of State."

When all of the President's foreign policy advisers gathered around the long
table in the Roosevelt Room at the White House for a series of briefings for the
Tokyo summit conference last week, Mr. Lake led the discussions.

But as the President sets out his vision of Asia policy this week, some say it
will have come not a moment too soon.

"We have been lax in setting out goals for the international community," said
Michael Mandlebaum, a former Clinton foreign policy adviser who directs the
East-West Project of the Council on Foreign Relations. "But just setting them
out would not mean we could achieve them. Because there are problems that no
other American President has had to deal with that Bill Clinton will have to
deal with."

NAME: W. Anthony Lake

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: W. Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser.
(Associated Press); Les Aspin, the Secretary of Defense, left, and Warren
Christopher, the Secretary of State, part of the backbone of President Clinton's
foreign policy team, during a recent ceremony at the White House. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Gas Tax Feared Where Commuting Takes Longest

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: BAILEY, Colo.


The quiet splendor of Park County, rich with towering pines and white-tailed
deer, seems a long way from the screech and clatter of urban life. And it is --
especially when the alarm clock rings before sunrise, and workers begin the long
journey to jobs in Denver.

Workers in this remote county of 7,200 in the Rocky Mountain foothills 40 miles
southwest of Denver face the longest average commuting time in the nation, 41
minutes each way, the Census Bureau found. Here the Senate vote last month to
raise Federal gasoline taxes to 18.4 cents a gallon from 14.1 cents is about as
popular as a pothole.

But most commuters here say they will simply brace themselves, absorb the bumps
and keep on driving.

"I guess we'll adjust," said Bob Neville, who makes a daily 90-mile round trip
to work at a utility company in Denver. "What else can you do?"

'Can't Give That Up'

Cindy Olsen, a researcher for the Colorado Press Association who lives in
Shawnee, said an increase in the gasoline tax would put a crimp in the budget.
But she could not imagine moving from the countryside.

"Other than take on extra riders, which we try to do, there's not much else we
can do," she said. "But there's just no way we can move back to town. The
wall-to-wall people, the sirens, dogs barking, kids yelling, stereos blaring.
No, that's what we moved away from. Trees and birds don't make a lot of noise,
you know. We can't give that up."

But to Wilburt and Kathy Cranford, who rise at 4:30 A.M. to drive to jobs in
Denver every day, the proposed tax is the last straw. The Cranfords have put
their house up for sale and say they will move to Denver.

"I'm not a rich man," said Mr. Cranford, a 49-year-old computer specialist. "The
tax doesn't sound like much. But you add it up. For people in rural areas, it's
a killer."

$3,000 a Year for Gas

The Cranfords, who recently watched the odometer on their 1988 all-terrain truck
roll past the 140,000 mile mark, say they can no longer afford the fuel costs.
They spend more than $3,000 a year on gasoline.

More than just the cost of gasoline, now about $1.20 a gallon here, Mr. Cranford
said he feared that the Federal tax would decrease the value of his cedar house
in the countryside.

"If it's going to cost more to live here," Mr. Cranford said, "then the houses
might not be worth as much, and we can't take the chance on our property value
going down."

The shortest average commuting time in the nation is in Mitchell County, Kan.,
where the typical resident, often a farmer, drives just 9 minutes to work.

The people in Park County would probably get little sympathy from commuters
around New York or Washington, who chug to work at a snail's pace, and don't
have a splendid view of the mountains to sweeten the trip.

But unlike those commuters, residents in Park County, where the elevation soars
beyond 9,000 feet, do not have the option of taking a train or subway. There is
a bus, which costs about $60 a month, but it does not stop near the places the
Cranfords work.

"I really don't want to live in the city," said Mr. Cranford, 49, a Vietnam
veteran who moved to the mountains 20 years ago after becoming embittered about
the way society treated its returning soldiers. "I just wanted to be left alone.
And it's been wonderful."

But he said he could no longer afford his dream. "It's purely a financial
decision," he said. "It all comes down to gasoline."

The couple considered buying a smaller car that would use less gasoline. But on
the treacherous, winding road to Denver, ice and "whiteout" blizzards would pose
a dangerous threat to a lighter vehicle.

Some motorists here said the tax sounded like it was concocted by someone who
could work in his house, like President Clinton, who has supported the increase.
And they chafed that nobody in Washington lobbied the Government for ordinary
commuters.

"If they keep hiking this and raising that, they're going to put us all in the
poorhouse," said Jerry Larsen, whose four-wheel-drive truck gets about 12 miles
to the gallon. "I'll be retired in a few years, so I'll just try to stick it out
until then."

For Todd Orman, a construction worker, the increase in gasoline prices might
mean turning down distant jobs. He now travels as much as 75 miles a day to
work.

"I work one full day just to pay for the week's gasoline," said Mr. Orman, who
drives a 1977 pickup that gets only 10 miles to the gallon. "I try to car pool,
but it's hard when my destination changes so often. And sometimes I don't get a
full day's work because of the weather. If I only work a half-day, the pay just
goes for the gasoline."

A few residents said they grudgingly supported the tax. "I understand that
Congress is going to have to raise taxes," said Dwight Powell. "Somewhere along
the line, the Government has to pay its bills."

Dennis Eckman, an electrical foreman for the Burlington Railroad, said the gas
tax seemed about as fair as any. He added, of course, that he drives a
Volkswagen Beetle.

"As long as they use the money on what it's intended for, and don't waste any, I
guess I won't complain," he said. "I'll just have to cut corners some place
else."

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I'm not a rich man," said Wilburt Cranford, a computer
specialist who gets up at 4:30 daily to commute from Park County, Colo., with
his wife, Kathy, to jobs in Denver. "The tax doesn't sound like much. But you
add it up. For people in rural areas, it's a killer." (Peter M. Fredin for The
New York Times)

Map/Diagram: "Commuting Time to Work, County by County"

Average one-way commuting time to work in those counties where most residents
drive to work. The average commuting time in the United States in 1990 was 22.4
minutes from door to door. The figures reflect areas where people live, not
where they work. Most people in New York City do not drive to work; in
Manhattan, for instance, only 8.3% of 1,487,536 residents drive to work.

Presumably, a gasoline tax would affect the darker counties more than the
lighter ones because they spend more on gas. (Data source: Andrew A. Beveridge,
Sociology, Queens College from the Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook: Deconstructing 'Tommy';
Watch for the Reagan Touches

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


Fortyish man: "I hear they took out the LSD, cleaning up the show for the middle
class."

Thirtyish woman: "But wasn't it middle-class people who took LSD in the 60's?"

Fortyish man: "I guess. But now they're all pretending they didn't."

-- Overheard in line at the Broadway show "Tommy"
 Remember Marilyn Quayle's speech before the Republican National Convention?
Remember the surrealist grin and the schoolmarm tone when she said: "Not
everyone joined the counterculture. Not everyone demonstrated, dropped out, took
drugs, joined in the sexual revolution or dodged the draft"?

That was the last gasp of the Reaganaut plan to criminalize the counterculture
years -- expunge them, if possible -- in order to resurrect the gray and
repressive 50's. This was evident in everything the Government did. The National
Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities were politicized. Despite the AIDS
epidemic, federally funded studies of sexual behavior were canceled because
Victorians in Congress objected to them.

This bid to bring back the 50's was voted down in November. That was too late to
inform Pete Townshend's musical, "Tommy," currently on Broadway. Though it
springs from the era that's despised in conservative politics, this musical
might even pass muster in the heart of Republican Central, even with that
narrowest of minds, Jesse Helms, who was culture cop under Presidents Reagan and
Bush. That's a suspicious development.

Mr. Townshend was the main composer and equipment-smashing guitarist for the
Who, the British rock band. The Broadway show "Tommy" is based on Mr.
Townshend's rock opera of the same name, first recorded in 1969. "Tommy" has had
other incarnations, as a film, a ballet and a concert production, but the opera
on vinyl remains the canonical text, followed closely by Ken Russell's movie of
six years later.

Nineteen sixty-nine was as counter as the counterculture got. This was the year
of Woodstock and of the bloodiest, most divisive interval in the Vietnam War.
The opera is steeped in cynicism and rebelliousness. In it a pinball wizard who
is deaf, dumb and blind regains his senses, becomes a cult hero, then goes nuts.
When Tommy abuses his followers they revolt, singing "We're not gonna take it,"
which became an anthem of the period.

The Broadway "Tommy" is tame, almost Reaganesque in its domestic tranquillity.
As The Times's Jon Pareles has noted, the original Tommy had more in common with
Charles Manson than with the sympathetic character on Broadway. This Broadway
Tommy is benevolent, even visionary. His parents are Ozzie and Harriet compared
to the loathsome couple to whom the kid was commended in Ken Russell's movie.

The musical tries mightily to evade the 60's drug culture that spawned it. The
opera was created for an era when casual drug use -- especially of LSD -- had
yet to lose its luster. The musical jettisons that legacy in a way that seems
dishonest. Mr. Townshend told The Los Angeles Times that the opera had "found a
new context outside the post-psychedelic mentality." But why was this "new
context" necessary?

Perhaps the 60's were shifted off stage to avoid marketing risks. That's
understandable, given the investment required and the recent despisement of the
counterculture. Even so, it would be nice to see "Tommy" held to its history.
Listen to the original recording. Rent the movie. Bring both to bear on the
Broadway musical. Don't let Pete shed the past so easily.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Harrison E. Salisbury, 84, Author and Reporter, Dies

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3283 words


Harrison E. Salisbury, a dashing Pulitzer Prize-winning correspondent for The
New York Times who roamed some of the world's most inaccessible places and later
became a top editor and prolific author, died Monday morning in a car that his
wife was driving outside Providence, R.I. He was 84 and lived in Taconic, Conn.

The cause was a sudden heart attack, said his wife, Charlotte Y. Salisbury, who
added that her husband had a history of heart problems.

Mr. Salisbury was the author of 29 books, among them the 1969 best seller "The
900 Days: the Siege of Leningrad." He was also the first editor of the Op-Ed
page at The Times.

He won his Pulitzer Prize in 1955 for a series of articles he wrote after five
years as The Times's bureau chief in Moscow. Much of his other work, as
journalist and author, also dealt with events in the Communist world.

But he also served as chief of Times correspondents around the United States
from 1962 to 1964. In that post he directed coverage of the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy.

Later, as one of the chief editors of The Times, he worked to maintain and
enhance the quality of various aspects of its news report. He took steps, along
with other editors, to enrich the coverage of areas like the arts and religion.

Nurturing a Novelty In Times Coverage

It was in 1970 that the Op-Ed page was begun, with Mr. Salisbury in charge, and
he supervised it until he retired from The Times in 1973. The page appears daily
opposite the editorials and has articles by outside contributors, voicing a wide
variety of views, in addition to commentary by regular Times columnists. It also
pioneered the American use of nonpartisan but political satirical illustration.

At the page's inception, Mr. Salisbury later recalled in a volume of memoirs, he
"feared we might run out of materials and piled up an inventory of 150
articles." But he added with characteristic brio: "I was stupid. We got 100 to
200 submissions a week. Everyone in the country wanted to speak out, and we let
their voices be heard."

His own voice was heard in his books and thousands of dispatches.

"The 900 Days," about how the Soviet Union's second-largest city endured a
protracted Nazi siege, drew enthusiastic praise. "I do not believe that any
other Westerner could have written this epic so well," the British man of
letters C. P. Snow wrote in The Times Book Review.

As a correspondent and an author, Mr. Salisbury was intrepid, enterprising and
indefatigable. His last book, "Heroes of My Time," was published earlier this
year, and in a review of it written for next Sunday's issue of The Times Book
Review, Michael Janeway, dean of the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern
University, offered, quite unaware, a valedictory, calling Mr. Salisbury a
"monument to the fine perversity of the reporter in the field who deals in grit,
risks life and limb and tilts against orthodoxy."

'Romantic' Reporter Who Could Do It All

Clifton Daniel, a fellow foreign correspondent who went on to be Mr. Salisbury's
boss as managing editor of The Times, said yesterday: "He not only was a
romantic correspondent, he was also a practical newspaperman who could handle
every aspect of his trade. His great journalistic creation was the Op-Ed page of
The New York Times. He created a sensation with it."

Some of Mr. Salisbury's fellow journalists whispered that he sometimes
exaggerated in his reporting. He had a nearly boundless confidence in his
reporting and intuitions, one that would sometimes lead him to conclusions that,
given his larger-than-life personality, few editors at the time dared challenge.

His admirers saw these same qualities as positive.

Neil Sheehan, an author who spent eight years as a Times reporter, emphasized
yesterday what he saw as Mr. Salisbury's contentiousness. "He had physical and
moral courage, a wonderfully suspicious mind, a remarkable instinct for
detecting falsehood and a delight at exposing lies in print," Mr. Sheehan said.

He added that Mr. Salisbury's "great contribution as a journalist was his
capacity for making trouble for the powerful, such as his reporting from Hanoi,
in 1966, that the Johnson Administration was killing thousands of civilians
while claiming to be conducting a 'surgical bombing campaign' in North Vietnam."


Making His Mark In the Soviet Union

Turner Catledge, who was managing editor and then executive editor of The Times
from 1951 to 1968, wrote in his memoirs that his predecessor as managing editor,
Edwin L. James, said he would hire Mr. Salisbury if Mr. Salisbury could get a
visa to enter the Soviet Union. Mr. Salisbury had had a fine career with the
United Press, and The Times had an opening in Moscow.

"He returned with the visa in a couple of weeks," Mr. Catledge wrote, "and for
the next five years" -- 1949 to 1954 -- "he was our correspondent in Russia,
doing an excellent job under the most difficult circumstances."

He subsequently was a wide-ranging reporter and correspondent based in New York
before being placed in charge of the paper's national coverage from 1962 to
1964, assistant managing editor from 1964 to 1972 and associate editor from 1972
to 1973.

In later years, he contributed occasional articles and reviews to The Times and
continued writing books, including "Without Fear or Favor: The New York Times
and Its Times" (1980).

Mr. Salisbury was highly versatile, a "journalistic one-man band" in Mr.
Catledge's phrase.

"He can report, he can write, he can edit, he can see story ideas, he can direct
others," Mr. Catledge said. "He can do all these things because, besides having
natural talent, he has a passion to excel."

A lanky six-footer, Mr. Salisbury was shrewd, reflective, sometimes aloof and
unquenchably enthusiastic about his work. He called himself a "flat-toned
Midwesterner," but he had an fine-toned sense of history.

He also had a flair for highlighting those aspects of a situation that he found
dramatic -- including, now and then, his own presence on the scene. Recalling a
reporting trip to North Vietnam in the winter of 1966-1967, he wrote, "I could
have been killed in Hanoi as I crouched in a concrete manhole while the B-52's
flew over."

A Censor's Hand On Dispatches

During the cold war years that he spent as a Times correspondent in the Soviet
Union, his reportage came in for criticism. Gay Talese, a former Times reporter,
wrote later in "The Kingdom and the Power," that in those years there were Times
readers who considered that Mr. Salisbury's "dispatches reflected excessive
sympathy for the Soviet Union."

For his part, Mr. Salisbury emphasized that his reports had been subjected to
heavy censorship by the Soviet authorities, and he later criticized Times
executives for not labeling them "Passed by Soviet Censor."

Yet censorship was not a problem for him in writing his Pulitzer Prize-winning
series of 14 articles: he typed much of it in a room at the Hotel Algonquin
after his return from Moscow.

The series included what he later described as "observations of reality as I had
seen it in Russia from the Neva to the Amur, from the Lena to the Volga, a
detailed reconstruction of Stalin's terror, an overview of Russia's real life --
the drunkenness, the bureaucracy and the famine of goods, services and ideas
after nearly 40 years of Bolshevism -- a firsthand glimpse of the new leaders,
the new policies, the extent to which they were, and were not, breaking from
their Stalinist roots."

Though the articles won widespread praise, it was not unanimous. Robert Manning,
a former editor in chief of the Atlantic, wrote later that "critics on the right
damned the series for softness toward the Communists."

Turning Attention To Issues at Home

Mr. Salisbury's ensuing years as a New York-based reporter were full of variety.
He plunged into local reporting with an enthusiasm rare for a returned foreign
correspondent, a routine assignment on dirty streets turning into a major series
on the city's sanitation system, a visit to Brooklyn juvenile delinquents
turning into a book, "The Shook-Up Generation."

He was on temporary duty in the Balkans for part of 1957, and The Times won a
Pulitzer Prize for its international reporting that year.

In 1960 a wave of sit-in demonstrations by blacks spread across the South, and
The Times sent Mr. Salisbury to appraise the racial situation in Southern
cities.

He arrived in Birmingham, Ala., where the police commissioner, T. Eugene Connor,
known as Bull, had declared to the city's blacks "as long as you live and as
along as Connor lives, there will be segregation in Birmingham and in the
South."

Mr. Salisbury was soon told that there had already been violence against blacks
and Jews there, and he was struck by the degree of anxiety he found in the city.
He then wrote a dispatch that The Times published on the front page under the
headline "Fear and Hatred Grip Birmingham."

In that article, he wrote that in Birmingham "more than a few citizens, both
white and Negro, harbor growing fear that the hour will strike when the smoke of
civil strife will mingle with" the ordinary fumes from local heavy industry.

He also wrote that "every channel of communication, every medium of mutual
interest, every reasoned approach, every inch of middle ground has been
fragmented by the emotional dynamite of racism, enforced by the whip, the razor,
the gun, the bomb, the torch, the club, the knife, the mob, the police and many
branches of the state's apparatus."

His reporting provoked outrage in some quarters. A headline in The Birmingham
News read, "N.Y. Times Slanders Our City -- Can This Be Birmingham?"

Before long, Mr. Connor and other city officials filed libel suits variously
against Mr. Salisbury and The Times, asking millions of dollars in damages.

Late in 1964, an Alabama court found in favor of Mr. Connor after other suits
had been dismissed. He was awarded $40,000.

But when the case moved up to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit, the judges found that Mr. Connor was not entitled to damages and
declared that Mr. Salisbury and The Times had "exhibited a high standard of
reporting practices."

Quick Reaction To Death in Dallas

After becoming director of The Times's national coverage, Mr. Salisbury was
having lunch at a midtown Manhattan club on Nov. 22, 1963, when a fellow club
member brought word that President Kennedy had been shot.

Mr. Salisbury wrote later, "I dropped my napkin, leaped down the stairs, ran the
two and a half blocks" to the Times building and got "on the telephone to order
staff to Dallas -- everyone I could reach who could fly in by nightfall."

The White House correspondent for The Times -- Tom Wicker, later a Times
columnist -- was in the Presidential motorcade when the bullets struck Kennedy.
He spent the hours that followed gathering facts, quotations and other material
for what became The Times's main article about the assassination.

Mr. Salisbury, describing his own work that day, wrote later: "I made one
contribution to Tom's beautiful story. At 5 P.M. I ordered him to halt reporting
and start writing. Just write every single thing you have seen and heard.
Period. He did. Through Tom's eye we lived through each minute of that fatal
Friday."

Then Mr. Salisbury remained at his desk in the newsroom, as he put it, "almost
continuously for the next several days," overseeing post-assassination coverage.


Two Crucial Weeks In North Vietnam

In his years as a Times editor, he continued to do reporting, and he aroused
controversy with his dispatches in December 1966 and January 1967 about North
Vietnam, where, after long efforts to obtain a visa, he was admitted and spent
two weeks while the Vietnam War raged.

After arriving in Hanoi, he reported that American warplanes had been bombing
nonmilitary targets in North Vietnamese cities, despite denials from the United
States Government.

In his first dispatch from the capital of North Vietnam, he wrote, "Contrary to
the impression given by the United States communiques, on-the-spot inspection
indicates that American bombing has been inflicting considerable civilian
casualties in Hanoi and its environs for some time past."

His reporting about North Vietnam won praise, but it was also challenged and
criticized by officials of the Defense and State Departments, some congressmen
and others.

In addition, Mr. Catledge wrote in his memoirs that "I'm sorry to say that we in
New York compounded an editorial slip that gave Salisbury's critics something to
harp on."

"In his first dispatch, Salisbury gave no attribution for figures on the
civilian casualties he reported," Mr. Catledge went on. "Quickly, with an air of
triumph, U.S. Government officials declared that Salisbury's casualty figures
were the same as those put out by the Government of North Vietnam."

Mr. Catledge contended in his memoirs that this criticism was silly and added,
"Where else would he get such figures in North Vietnam? He did not claim to have
counted the bodies himself."

"I was sorry that we had not anticipated the objection," Mr. Catledge wrote,
"but we were so excited by Salisbury's series that we simply didn't think of
it." And he observed that "to end the issue we noted in later articles that the
figures came from North Vietnamese officials."

"Many people assumed that his feat would win him a second Pulitzer Prize," Mr.
Catledge continued. "I was serving on the Pulitzer advisory board and thus I was
present when the board (with me abstaining, as was the practice when one's own
paper was nominated) narrowly voted against giving the Pulitzer Prize to
Salisbury.

"I was terribly upset by this vote, because I was convinced that several of my
colleagues made their decision on political rather than journalistic grounds;
indeed, they made no bones about it. They supported the war, so they voted
against Salisbury."

A Change in Focus, This Time to China

After Mr. Salisbury retired from The Times in 1973, he achieved the remarkable
feat of writing more than a dozen books while in his late 60's, 70's and 80's.

He was admired for acquiring extensive expertise about China relatively late in
his career, after making a name for himself as an expert on the Soviet Union,
and also for his tireless and repeatedly successful efforts to get access to
many useful informants in exotic and sometimes unfriendly locales.

His introduction to China came in the mid-1960's. Mr. Daniel, as The Times's
managing editor, sent him on a wide-ranging tour of Asia, concentrating on the
countries bordering China. Mr. Salisbury reported on his travels in a series of
articles that ended in mid-August 1966.

"That trip started to switch his expertise to China," Mr. Daniel recalled
yesterday, "although he still maintained contacts in the Soviet Union. He knew
hundreds of Chinese and Soviet personalities unknown to most other journalists."

Some other journalists have suggested that Mr. Salisbury would sometimes defer
his more critical writing about a given milieu until he had gained access to
informers there. But admiring journalists have emphasized that his reporting
from some news centers, notably Moscow, was limited by censorship.

For his part, Mr. Daniel said, "Harrison Salisbury, like many other
correspondents, used his wiles to get into places and later wrote more
critically about them than they expected to be written about, particularly when
he was out of those places."

Mr. Salisbury did further eyewitness writing about events in Asia in 1989, when
he happened to be in Beijing, making a television documentary, when the Chinese
Government cracked down bloodily on dissident students in Tiananmen Square. Much
of his reporting was published in the form of a book, "Tiananmen Diary: Thirteen
Days in June" (Little, Brown, 1989).

From Minnesota To Great Beyond

The contentious tone in some of Mr. Salisbury's writing was not surprising,
given his Minnesota roots and his admiration for what he once called "the
Minnesota spirit, skeptical, contrarian, often out of step, hostile to the
Bigs."

Harrison Evans Salisbury was born Nov. 14, 1908, in Minneapolis, the son of
Percy Pritchard Salisbury and Georgiana Evans Salisbury, and attended schools
there. After doing some reporting for The Minneapolis Journal in 1928 and 1929,
he earned a B.A. degree from the University of Minnesota in 1930.

He went to work for the United Press in that year in St. Paul, becoming a
much-traveled correspondent based successively in Chicago, Washington and New
York before assignments in London in 1943 and Moscow in 1944. The wire-service
life with its speed, mobility and hustle shaped his reporting career. He was
foreign editor of the agency from 1944 to 1948.

Mr. Salisbury's two decades with the United Press -- now called United Press
International -- were hectic. Those years, 1930 to 1948, found him, as Mr.
Talese wrote, "moving from St. Paul to Chicago, from Washington to New York to
London to Cairo to Moscow, a hundred cities in between, moving so quickly to the
clamor of new disasters and datelines and deadlines that his own life sometimes
ceased to exist. There simply was no time to think about anything but the news,
to get it and write it and write it fast."

He also held editor's posts at the United Press, and as an editor he acquired a
reputation for pushing his correspondents hard. The habit stayed with him in his
time as national editor of The Times, the author David Halberstam, who worked
for him as a correspondent, recalled yesterday.

"He always pushed you," Mr. Halberstam said. "You were expected to come back
with the story. You were expected to get it, somehow."

Mr. Salisbury also had great strength of will. In his early years in journalism,
like not a few others of his profession, he was a heavy drinker and smoker, but
he gave up drinking for good while still at the United Press, associates
recalled yesterday, and later gave up smoking.

Flurry of Books And Awards, Too <HE

Of his books, at least 10 dealt with the Soviet Union; among them were "Moscow
Journal," "Black Night, White Snow: Russia's Revolutions 1905-1917" and "Russia
in Revolution 1900-1930." About a half dozen others concerned China, like
"China: 100 Years of Revolution," "The Long March: The Untold Story" and "The
New Emperors: China in the Era of Mao and Deng."

He also wrote a novel, "The Northern Palmyra Affair" and books on other parts of
the world, like "Travels Around America" and "The Many Americas Shall Be One."

He won several other awards for his reporting. He was president of the American
Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters in 1975 and 1976 and of the Authors
League from 1980 to 1985.

His 1933 marriage to Mary Jane Hollis ended in divorce in 1950. He married
Charlotte Young Rand in 1964.

Charlotte Salisbury traveled with her husband on almost all of his trips in his
last three decades. She also wrote books -- seven of them, all diaries -- about
their journeys, beginning with "Asian Diary" (1967) and continuing through "Long
March Diary" (1986).

On their trips, she recalled yesterday, "I just took notes all day the way
Harrison did, and we had a good time."

In addition to his wife, Mr. Salisbury is survived by a sister, Janet Salisbury,
of Minneapolis; two sons, Michael of Chicago and Stefan of Philadelphia, who
writes about the arts for the Philadelphia Inquirer; three stepdaughters,
Charlotte Parkinson of Manhattan; Ellen Rand of Brooklyn and Rosina Rand Rossire
of Salisbury, Conn.; a stepson, Curtis Rand, also of Salisbury; and 13
grandchildren.

NAME: Harrison E. Salisbury

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Harrison Salisbury won a Pulitzer Prize for articles he wrote
after serving as The New York Times bureau chief in Moscow. He returned to Red
Square in the mid-1960's. In Beijing in 1989, he walked in Tiananmen Square on
June 3, just hours before the massacre of demonstrators.

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT THE BALL PARK WITH: David Halberstam;
Making Legwork (and Edginess) a Virtue

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1815 words


BY the end of the first inning, things are shaping up pretty nicely at Yankee
Stadium. With the sun shining brightly, the home team has scored four runs on
four hits, leaving Minnesota's pitcher shellshocked. Oh, and one more thing.
Mighty Dave Winfield, the Twins' designated hitter, has taken strike three.

This development affords exquisite delight to David Halberstam. "God, how I love
to see that man strike out," he says, cackling softly.

There is a semiserious grudge here, a longstanding one. Mr. Halberstam was once
assigned to write a magazine profile of Mr. Winfield, then with the Yankees, but
found himself entangled in an endless series of preliminary phone calls,
meetings and lunches before a face-to-face encounter with the great man could be
approved. Finally, Mr. Halberstam pulled the plug on the whole thing. But he's
still fuming, in a good-natured sort of way.

"I mean, he's not a superstar; the guy is a high-competent player, a .280
hitter," Mr. Halberstam says, ticking off the counts in his indictment. "After
all these years he still overswings, even with two strikes on him. Let me tell
you, Eddie Lopat would have had him tied in knots every day of his life."

Mr. Halberstam, a rangy 59-year-old, is settling into the stadium comfortably,
after a tough road trip, flogging his book "The Fifties" (Villard Books), a
750-page whopper devoted to the decade that comes after his previous book,
"Summer of '49," about the 1949 pennant race between the Yankees and the Boston
Red Sox.

Mr. Halberstam regards the 50's as highly underrated. They had the bad fortune
to be followed by the younger and flashier 60's, which benefited from massive
television coverage, most of it in living color.

In "The Fifties" Mr. Halberstam tries to right the balance. Throwing his arms
wide, he embraces Elvis Presley and Richard Nixon, J. Robert Oppenheimer and Joe
McCarthy, Betty Friedan and Martin Luther King Jr., not to mention quiz-show
scandals, golden arches, "Peyton Place," tail fins and Levittown houses.

One thing they didn't have in the 50's was enforced rock music between innings,
broadcast at a volume that threatens to cause not just ear damage but brain
damage. Again and again, it kicks in just as Mr. Halberstam is elaborating on a
point.

He begins to grouse: "One reason for going to a ball game is for that particular
sound, a murmur that swells to a cheer and then a roar. It's lovely, and very
distinctive."

At one point, the fans rise, section by section, to take part in the wave. Mr.
Halberstam remains seated, radiating disapproval. Baseball is serious. The wave
is frivolous. Mr. Halberstam wants no part of it. The game he loves is played on
the field, and he follows its progress closely, commenting excitedly on the
brilliant future that awaits Bernie Williams, the Yankee outfielder, or on
Minnesota's unexpected use of the Ted Williams shift.

He has every reason to be happy. "The Fifties" is going great guns, currently
No. 2 on the New York Times best-seller list, despite mixed reviews. For Mr.
Halberstam's many admirers, it shows the virtues of his big-think productions,
book like "The Best and Brightest," "The Powers That Be" and "The Reckoning."
Truckloads of information. A good story backed by massive research. Mr.
Halberstam, who still interviews with a pen and notebook, hews to the old
journalistic virtues of diligence, persistence and legwork. He is very fond of
the word "legwork."

But some critics have never quite seen the point of Mr. Halberstam's work. Aside
from the writing style, which even his fans would probably describe as no more
than serviceable, there's the vexing question of what all the research, all the
interviews -- yes, all the legwork -- add up to in the end, other than
epic-scale rehashes.

What's more, in the case of "The Fifties," the epic seems to have a few gaps,
pointed out by George F. Will, among others. Some major figures, like William F.
Buckley Jr. and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, did not figure in the manuscript
(Mr. Halberstam says he regrets omitting Mr. Buckley but not the Rosenbergs).
Others ended up on the cutting room floor, since the book tipped the scales at
about 1,200 pages before being put on a crash diet. Wave goodbye to Jackson
Pollock and the Abstract Expressionists. "But I did the legwork," Mr. Halberstam
hastens to add.

Mr. Halberstam retains, to a remarkable degree, the gut journalistic instinct of
being interested in anything and everything, and a generosity that compels him
to share the wealth. He enjoys the sound of his own voice, and why not? In a
rich and resonant bass-baritone, he pours forth an unending stream of
entertaining stories, peppered with shrewd observations. He also has an uncanny
ability to spin out complicated thoughts while processing all sorts of visual
stimuli, which he passes along in the form of brief news bulletins.

"Look, she's wearing a Ho Chi Minh hat," he says, amused, when the car that
takes him to the stadium passes a bicyclist on Madison Avenue. "That guy over
there, he's got a Charles Barkley haircut and a Barkley shirt," he says. "Bet he
doesn't have the rebounding ability, though."

At the game, he manages to theorize at length about the evolution of the
affluent society, keep close tabs on the Yankee lineup and eat a fancy
prosciutto, lettuce and tomato sandwich from E.A.T., all at the same time. No
hot dog for Mr. Halberstam. Just over 20 years of best-selling books have set
him up nicely. An apartment on the Upper West Side. A house on Nantucket.
Admission to the upper reaches of journalistic fame, where the lines that
separate reporters, statesmen and celebrities blur.

In Mr. Halberstam's cover profile of Harrison Ford in this month's Vanity Fair,
it is a little difficult at first to figure out which man is the subject. In an
author's blurb at the front of the magazine, Mr. Halberstam notes, "A mutual
friend said that I'm the ideal person to be Harrison Ford's biographer, because
we have the same edginess."

In truth, Mr. Halberstam has had the kind of career that most journalists hanker
after with a carnal desire. Four years at The Harvard Crimson, with summers at
The Hartford Courant, led to a first job as the sole reporter on The Daily Times
Leader in West Point, Miss. It was 1955, a year after the Brown desegregation
decision, and the first stirrings of Southern change were in the air.

Mr. Halberstam found his colleagues congenial, the work varied and the training
invaluable. "I think they were disappointed that I didn't know more about the
Old Testament, though," he says. When he wasn't writing all the stories in the
paper, he contributed longer articles to The Reporter, the liberal journal, on
race issues, which would soon drive a wedge between him and the newspaper's
owner.

On one occasion, Mr. Halberstam covered an address to election workers by a
politician named William Jefferson Tubb. It included this quotation from Mr.
Tubb: "If there are any niggers in this county who want to vote, we'll take them
out back and take care of them."

Mr. Halberstam's article repeated the remark. The owner wanted it out. The
rookie reporter refused. The owner offered what he thought was a civilized
compromise. "Couldn't we make it sound like he was trying to help them?" When
Mr. Halberstam moved on to The Nashville Tennessean, in 1956, no tears were shed
by reporter or owner.

"It was a wonderful way to begin a career," he says. "The town was so small that
I could watch the structure of power and how it worked. I brought that to
Nashville, and then to Vietnam."

It was Vietnam, where Mr. Halberstam worked as a foreign correspondent for The
New York Times in 1962 and 1963, that established his reputation. He was among
the first of the dogged, skeptical reporters who broke with journalistic
tradition and began asking embarrassing questions about America's burgeoning
adventure in Southeast Asia.

In 1964, he shared a Pulitzer Prize with Malcolm W. Browne, then of The
Associated Press and now of The New York Times, each honored for his reporting
on Vietnam.

While on assignment in Warsaw, he met and married Poland's top film and
television actress, Elzbieta Czyzewska. His reporting was deemed slanderous by
the Polish Government, and he was ordered out of the country. She went with him.
(They were divorced in 1977, and in 1979 he remarried. He and his wife, Jean,
have a 12-year-old daughter, Julia.)

But the job of newspaper reporting was losing its allure. "I was already
restless with daily journalism, with the form, and Vietnam made me more so," he
says. "You could really see how the form favored the government and the
institutions. In Vietnam, a good reporter was someone who went to officials and
reported what they said -- but all of them were liars or fools."

Elsewhere in journalism, new currents were stirring. "I was reading magazine
stuff of people like Gay Talese and Tom Wolfe, who were developing a newer,
richer form of journalism," Mr. Halberstam says. "I wanted to get in on that."

He did. For several years, he wrote about politics for Harper's Magazine. Then
in 1972, came "The Best and the Brightest," an angry, widely acclaimed history
of the men and the policies that led the United States down the road to Vietnam.

Big books followed, on the press and television in America ("The Powers That
Be," 1979), on the rise of Nissan and the decline of Ford ("The Reckoning,"
1986), as well as a string of well-received, slimmer books on sports. In "The
Breaks of the Game" (1982) he followed the Portland Trailblazers for a season,
and in "The Amateurs" (1985) he told the story of four scullers training for the
Olympics.

"The Amateurs" was a book close to his heart. A rower since college days, he
keeps two sculls at his house on Nantucket. His bone-crunching handshake is an
index of his enthusiasm. Both sculls are getting extra duty this summer. Mr.
Halberstam, facing his 60th birthday, has vowed to achieve peak physical
condition.

Then back to the word processor -- a reluctant concession to the modern age --
and "the cage," as he calls his office in a separate apartment at the back of
his building, where he writes with Mozart or Jimmy Witherspoon in the
background. After polishing off a book about the 1964 World Series, between the
Yankees and the St. Louis Cardinals, Mr. Halberstam will begin a then-and-now
chronicle of the key figures in the lunch counter sit-ins in the South, which he
covered as a young reporter.

Come fall, the machine will kick into gear. Two interviews a day. Lots of time
in the library. Lots of legwork.

"I never thought of myself as a stylist, and I don't have the luminous
brilliance of Wolfe," he says. "I always thought my job was to work hard, do the
interviews, get the anecdotes and insights, and if I did that, I could work up a
pretty good story."

NAME: David Halberstam

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Halberstam at a Yankee game after his own road trip
promoting "The Fifties." (Steve Hart for The New York Times) (pg. C1); David
Halberstam at Harvard in 1954. (The Harvard Crimson) (pg. C8)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


To the Editor:

The change in United States policy to permit loans by the International Monetary
Fund to Vietnam (front page, July 1) is welcome news to the many American
nongovernmental organizations with projects in Vietnam. They will provide more
than $15 million in relief and development assistance this year.

Press accounts make it seem as if debate over this issue is a self-interested
controversy between business on the one hand and prisoner-of-war and
missing-in-action family groups on the other. A third dimension is reflected in
the 200 organizations and institutions represented at the fourth annual
conference of the United States Nongovernmental Organization Forum on Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos that was held at Marymount University in Arlington, Va., June
17 to 20.

These humanitarian, religious and educational institutions have not only been
laying the groundwork for normalization between American and Vietnamese society
for 18 years, but they are also a less visible pressure group for policy change.
Attending the conference were large, long-established humanitarian aid and
development organizations along with new, smaller groups founded by Vietnam
veterans.

Representatives of universities, people-to-people exchanges, English-teaching
programs and Indochinese-American groups play an increasingly important role in
our meetings. A growing number of people from business and United States
Government agencies also take part.

About half the participants signed a letter to President Clinton urging that he
end American objection to loans from international financial institutions, lift
the United States trade embargo and move toward normalization, including
establishment of diplomatic liaison offices with consular authority.

JOHN MC AULIFF
JOY CAROL
New York, July 1, 1993

The writers are, respectively, coordinator and convenor, U.S. N.G.O. Forum on
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam;
Hold Out for P.O.W.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


To the Editor:

The American Legion takes exception to "Stop Punishing Vietnam" (editorial, June
27). We should stop punishing ourselves. The right thing to do in our
relationship with Vietnam is to achieve the fullest possible accounting for
Americans held prisoner of war and missing in action from the Vietnam War.
Specifically, Hanoi must release Americans held prisoner, provide their remains
or tell us why neither is possible. To accept anything less is to perpetuate the
emotional agony Americans have endured for more than two decades.

We particularly disagree with your view of "undeniable" progress on the part of
the Vietnamese. Vietnam's "cooperation" has been minimal and manipulative.
According to Pentagon figures, 265 remains were released between 1974 and 1990;
only 4 were released in 1991 and none through September 1992. Moreover, less
than six months ago the principal government official responsible for this issue
estimated that the Vietnamese had released less than 1 percent of the
information available to them.

Representative Ben Gilman of New York has introduced H. R. 2521, a P.O.W.-M.I.A.
full accounting bill. Mr. Gilman lists 27 issues that must be addressed, many by
the Vietnamese.

Last week in a letter to President Clinton, I noted Vietnamese manipulation and
lack of cooperation and urged him to hold the line on International Monetary
Fund loan authority. We believe he was on track in the pledge made to us at our
1992 national convention in Chicago, when he said if he was elected the files
would be thrown open, the roadblocks torn down and the truth would come out. He
also said America must never leave its warriors on the battlefield.

The American Legion will continue to oppose any bridge loan or I.M.F. loan
approval, lifting the trade embargo or normalization of relations with Vietnam
until real progress is made.

ROGER A. MUNSON
Natl. Commander, American Legion
Washington, June 28, 1993

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Still, Papa Was Right

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


People who believe in U.F.O.'s demonstrated at the White House the other day
demanding that the Government come clean. Their placards said the Government
knew U.F.O.'s "are real," and they want it to quit pretending they're not and
tell what it knows about these visitors from out yonder.

I tend to believe almost anybody who says the Government is suppressing the
facts. That's what comes of living through the Vietnam War, Watergate and the
C.I.A.'s reporting on the robust health of the Soviet Union.

Well do I recall stories of Ernest Hemingway telling friends the F.B.I. was
watching him. Everybody said it was sad evidence that Papa had gone round the
bend into raving paranoia. Later Herbert Mitgang of The Times won access to the
files and -- how about this, paranoia fans! -- the F.B.I. had been watching
Hemingway all along.

So I am in no hurry to ridicule people who say the Government is engaged in a
U.F.O. cover-up. Truth to tell, being a romantic as well as a skeptic, I'd like
there to be extraterrestrial things fooling around with Earth.

The same romantic streak makes me want Elvis to be still alive somewhere making
music privately, or maybe with Nat "King" Cole.  (Have you noticed that another
Nat "King" Cole record comes along almost every year even though the papers
reported his death back in 1965?)

Still, the skeptical part of me resists the U.F.O. people. The question I have
never been able to answer satisfactorily is, Why Earth? Let's try a little role
reversal and imagine that we, you and I, live somewhere far out in the cosmos
where the intellectual brilliance is so dazzling that traveling faster than
light is no problem.

Having cracked the light barrier, we have the whole gigantic universe at our
disposal, so I can imagine us one night tooling around faster than light, maybe
just taking the old F.O. out for a spin.

As an Earth person old enough to have experienced the un-air-conditioned house,
I remember an uncle piling everybody into his Whippet one breathless summer
night and driving from Belleville, N.J., all the way up to Suffern, N.Y., on a
search for cool air.

We might do the same thing if we had a machine that could leave light in the
dust: just pile in, going for a drive as it were, and nipping off to some lively
corner of the universe.  Off the beaten track maybe we spot this funny little
place full of funny little things called people.

Maybe we've been headed out toward the big rock-candy galaxy where the hens lay
soft-boiled eggs and the cops have rubber legs when we see this little place --
Earth, of course -- sitting well off the side of the road as it were. Strange
sounds come off it. Curious to see if maybe it's a revival meeting in progress,
we pause for a glance.

Now I am making us sound a lot more like Earth people than we are. The fact is
that compared with us, Earth people are as dumb as cabbages. So dumb they
haven't even figured out how to crack the light barrier.

They creep around their dreary, desiccated old planetary neighborhood in ancient
heaps made of primitive metals, inside which they are comically dependent on an
artificially provided nitrogen-oxygen compound to maintain what they think of,
with their utter lack of imagination, as life.

Mostly, however, their activity consists of moving about slowly in clotted
masses when not positioned motionlessly, apparently narcotized, in front of
boxes. This, I submit, is not a place where creatures like us are likely to
tarry.

By our standards, it is strictly pre-history. In fact, there is an excellent
replica of it back home in the Museum of Prehistoric Absurdity. Oh sure, maybe
to amuse ourselves we stop, pick up a couple of these cabbage brains, bring them
into our F.O. and have a little fun with them. You know, pretending we're not
going to let them go unless they can name the capitals of all 50 states or sing
the second verse of "The Star-Spangled Banner."

Personally, I can't see us coming back. Or even hanging around.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Civil War Gains New Legions of Fans

BYLINE: By BILL RYAN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 1; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words


AS wars go, the Civil War was long in the nation's past and presumably mostly
forgotten. Even the centennial of the war, in the 1960's, failed to attract much
attention, perhaps because the country was absorbed in a newer war, in Vietnam.

Then, in 1991, came a riveting nine-part program on public television about the
war that had torn the nation apart in the last century. Suddenly the Civil War
had returned to the public consciousness.

In Connecticut, evidence of the new interest is supplied by membership in two
organizations that were all but moribund before the television series.

One is the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States, which was
started in 1865 by former Union officers from Philadelphia who had served as an
honor guard in the funeral cortege of Abraham Lincoln. The idea was to show
loyalty to the Federal Government at a time when fear was strong that attempts
might be made to assassinate other leaders.

Elite of Veterans

The Legion, limited to commissioned officers, became the most elite of all
veterans groups, sprinkled with names like Ulysses S. Grant, William T. Sherman,
Philip H. Sheridan and George Armstrong Custer. In addition to Grant, four other
men who would also be President of the United States were members: Rutherford B.
Hayes, Chester A. Arthur, Benjamin Harrison and William McKinley. By the turn of
the century, more than 8,000 former Union officers had joined the Legion.

As more of them died off, the organization adopted a measure that would allow it
to continue: direct descendants of Union officers would be allowed to join. As
this century ebbed, however, the organization was little more than an echo of
past glory. Connecticut membership in 1990 was down to 12, said the Rev. Robert
Girard Carroon, the commander of the state chapter of the organization, known as
a commandery.

Now, he reports, it is 71, reflecting a trend that has seen national membership
reach about 2,000, more than twice what it was a few years ago.

Father Carroon -- he is an Episcopal priest who traces his ancestry to eight
Civil War officers, four Union, four Confederate -- said he could only attribute
the new interest in the war to the 1991 television series created by Ken Burns.
Mr. Burns, who lives in New Hampshire, is a member of the Connecticut Legion,
since New Hampshire does not have a branch.

"I have a friend who is a book publisher," Father Carroon said, "and he tells me
that 2,000 new titles about the war are coming out each year now, everything
from soldiers' narratives to stories of individual battles. He has a small
business and he tells me that he has enough work on the Civil War to last him
for five years."

The number of Civil War Round Tables, small groups that meet periodically to
discuss the war, has also increased sharply. A few years ago, there were two in
Connecticut; now there are at least seven.

In a Victorian Time Warp

This year, the Legion held its annual meeting at the headquarters of the
Rockville chapter of the Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War, which has
increased its membership fourfold in the last few years. The organization meets
in the Grand Army of the Republic room in Rockville's town hall, a place that
seems locked in a Victorian-era time warp.

The town hall was dedicated in 1890, an ornate pile of brownstone and brick
perched on a hill in the center of town. It was dedicated to the men from the
town who had fought in the Civil War a quarter of a century before and one huge
room on the second floor was set aside for the local chapter of the Grand Army
of the Republic, the society of Union veterans.

The Rockville G.A.R. post was one of hundreds that sprang up throughout the
Northern states in the decades after the war. From the first, the national Grand
Army of the Republic was a powerful political force. It was its commander in
chief in 1868, Gen.  John A. Logan, who decreed that May 30 be set aside each
year as Memorial Day to honor the graves of Union soldiers.

At its height, from 1880 to 1910, the organization had 250,000 members. But one
by one the old soldiers passed on. In many cities and towns, G.A.R. posts also
passed on. Some, however, were saved by a new organization, Sons of Union
Veterans, limited to descendants of men who had served in the war.

The Sons organization had also declined. In Rockville in 1990, a hundred years
after the town hall was dedicated, membership was down to 12. Now, spurred by
the new interest in the Civil War, the organization has been revitalized.
Membership is 48, and growing.

A prime mover in the new life of the organization is Ross S. Dent, a 47-year-old
purchasing agent who describes himself as a frustrated history teacher who could
not find a job teaching when he got out of the service in the Vietnam War era
and had to go into business. His interest in the local Civil War organization
began a few years ago and turned to fascination when he got his first look at
the town hall's Grand Army of the Republic room. "I freaked."

The room, with its heavy oak furniture, huge Bible, pictures of Lincoln and
Grant and Sherman marching to the sea in Georgia, appeared not to have changed
in a century, he said. "The room was a time capsule."

The Mystery Vanishes

It was also, he said, a great mystery. For a century, meetings of the Civil War
organizations, first the G.A.R. and then the Sons of Union Veterans, were
private affairs. The room was never opened to outsiders.

When Mr. Dent and others started to catalogue the room's contents, including
hundreds of old records and items like old pens and ink bottles and a tin of
Lucky Strike green pipe tobacco, they left the doors open for the first time.
And some visitors arrived.

"People flowed in from the rest of town hall," Mr. Dent said. "Some had worked
there for years and they had never been inside the room. 'We always wondered
what was behind the door,' they said. It was unbelievable."

The rejuvenated Sons organization decided to let other people see the glories of
the room, the last G.A.R. hall in the state still in use and possibly the last
one in the country with its original furnishings intact. Once a month, on a
Sunday, it is open to the public, and social affairs, including a junior high
school concert, have been held there. "We want to make it a culture center for
the Civil War and a teaching tool," Mr. Dent said.

Occasionally, he will put on a uniform and give little talks on the great war of
the last century and of the men who fought in it. Sometimes he does it in the
old G.A.R. room, a place of many ghosts. "You stand in the center of this room
and you can hear them talking about the battles they had seen," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ross S. Dent with a Union officer's hat and sword in the Grand
Army of the Republic room in Rockville's town hall. (Steve Miller for The New
York Times) (pg. 1); Painting of Col. Thomas F. Burpee in the Grand Army of the
Republic room in town hall dedicated to men from Rockville who fought in the
Civil War. (Steve Miller for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Brendan Bernhard

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 260 words



SHORT STORIES
AFGHAN TALES
Stories From Russia's Vietnam.
By Oleg Yermakov.
Morrow, $20.

The stories in Oleg Yermakov's brilliant collection, "Afghan Tales," are all
directly or indirectly about the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, which began
in 1979 and lasted for a decade. But to label them war stories would be
misleading. In "Baptism," a young soldier is introduced first to the beauty of
the Afghan landscape, then to his capacity for murder. In "Unit N Carried Out
Exercises," soldiers trapped on a mountainside glimpse a passenger jet "sailing
noiselessly" through the night sky, and their isolation from that other world --
the world not at war -- is made vivid. In fact, all of Mr. Yermakov's stories,
ably translated by Marc Romano, are haunted by some other world. Sometimes, as
in "The Yellow Mountain," about a wounded veteran working in a Soviet newspaper
office, the scene shifts from one place to another in midsentence: "Pryadilnikov
ran the tip of his pen across a piece of paper, and a flock of birds was slowly
landing on the steppe before bare, soft hills." As interested in nature as he is
in war, Mr. Yermakov goes on to imagine those birds mistaking a line of Russian
tanks for "shining green turtles." Such is the power of his imagery that for a
moment we do too. Mr. Yermakov, who served in Afghanistan in the early 1980's,
does not examine the politics of the Soviet invasion. In his view, war is simply
there, enormous, tedious, deadly, but never -- so far, anyway -- larger than the
landscape that frames it.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MARKET WATCH;
The Calm Before the Next Big Storm?

BYLINE: By Floyd Norris

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


LYNDON JOHNSON was seeking a full term as President, promising a "Great Society"
at home and no escalation in Vietnam. The Beatles were the newest music
sensation. America felt rich and successful, with economic growth topping 5
percent a year. And the stock market was rising ever so quietly, with virtually
no volatility.

Life in 1993 appears to be very different from 1964. Economic growth above 3
percent now seems like a distant memory, and even a mild economic stimulus
package is deemed unreasonable because of huge budget deficits. At last week's
summit meeting in Tokyo, President Clinton went to great lengths to note that
jobless prosperity is affecting all major industrial economies, not just this
one.

But on Wall Street, 1993 is shaping up as being very similar to 1964. Stock
prices have been rising ever so gently over the past year and a half, with
minimal volatility. In the first six months of this year, the high for the
Standard & Poor's 500 was just 6.4 percent above the low for the period. Only
once since the index began in 1930 -- in the second half of 1964 -- has there
been less volatility over a similar period. Then the figure was 6.1 percent.

Dick McCabe, Merrill Lynch's chief market analyst, notes that the normal pattern
is for periods of high volatility to follow times of slow action. When low
volatility lasts only a little while, there is no pattern to subsequent market
performance. But when dull markets keep on going like the Energizer bunny, there
does appear to be a pattern. Prices advance nicely amid the peaceful conditions.
But when the peace ends, so do the profits.

The most similar period to the present one came in the mid-1960's. From mid-1963
through the end of 1965, every half-year period showed volatility of less than
half the historic average of 21.6 percent. It was a great period to own stocks,
with the S.& P. 500 up 33.2 percent. But in 1966 the average lost 13.1 percent.

Volatility can serve to remind investors that stocks are inherently risky.
Without such reminders, it may be easier for valuation levels to move to
extraordinary levels. By late 1965, the dividend yield on the S.& P. 500 had
fallen to 2.91 percent, only a bit lower than the current level.

To bulls now, such valuations are not bothersome because interest rates are so
low. Where, after all, can someone put money other than in the stock market? In
1965, Treasury bill rates were a bit higher than they are now, and they were
rising. But long-term bond rates were under 4.5 percent, or well below current
levels. That fact did not prevent the market from sliding in 1966.

There are numerous signs that this bull market is nearer an end than a
beginning, ranging from the high levels of Nasdaq volume to the level of
speculation indicated by the phenomenal rises of stocks in companies with more
hope than history. But none of them prove that a bear market will come soon.
Let's hope that this dull stock market will last for another year or two.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nephew of Victim in Gay-Bias Slaying Is Beaten

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


The nephew of an emotionally troubled Vietnam veteran who was hunted down and
stabbed to death on a Staten Island beach three years ago -- because his
assailants believed he was gay -- was himself beaten by a group of young men
last week, some of whom made remarks about his sexual orientation, the police
said.

A police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch, said the attack occurred at 10:30 P.M.
on Monday on Gervil Street in Rossville, S.I., against Michael Zappalorti, 22
years old, the nephew of James Zappalorti, who was slain in 1990.

"The victim was walking home when he was confronted by a group of males,"
Officer Bloch said. "The men made remarks about the victim's sexual orientation.
The victim ran and was chased several blocks, and he was struck by one of the
suspects."

Yesterday Mayor David N. Dinkins issued a statement assailing what he called
"this ugly repetition."

The Mayor said he was distressed to learn that Mr. Zappalorti, whose uncle "was
ruthlessly killed in 1990 merely for being gay, had allegedly been attacked by a
gang."

'Consequences of Bigotry'

In his statement, Mayor Dinkins said, "While it is hard to understand the
reasons why anyone would harm or even kill another just because they are
different, we all know that it has to do with ignorance and that ignorant
behavior is intolerable."

"The Zappalorti family has suffered enough from the consequences of bigotry,"
Mr. Dinkins added. "Our city has suffered enough. Let us not let it happen
again."

Mr. Zappalorti, who could not be reached for comment yesterday, was treated for
minor injuries at Staten Island Hospital and released.

Two days after the attack, Officer Bloch said, detectives from the Bias Incident
Investigation Unit arrested Andrew Dubitsky, 17, of 140 Redwood Loop, and
charged him with second-degree assault. Other suspects are being sought.

The director of the Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project, Matt Foreman, said:
"I am pleased the Mayor responded, but the fact remains that there are more than
two dozen people involved in the incident who haven't been arrested. And I think
we need a more vigorous law-enforcement response." Mr. Foreman said his
organization would be offering a $5,000 reward for information leading the
conviction of the others involved.

2 Arrests in Slaying

Two men were eventually arrested in the killing of Mr. Zappalorti's uncle, who
was found dead on Jan. 23, 1990, on the Arthur Kill beach where he had built a
small shack from scrap lumber. The 44-year-old victim had been robbed and the
house nearby where he lived with his parents was ransacked.

The victim's parents said at the time that their son had been left shell-shocked
by his experience in Vietnam. A neighbor, Owen Reiter, described him as
"intelligent, but socially maladjusted."

The police said the victim had been stabbed many times in the chest, and his
throat had been slashed. His trousers and boots were lying nearby, along with a
bloodstained knife.

One suspect, Michael Taylor, 24, a neighbor living at 83 Androvette Street, was
arrested the day after the crime. A month later, Philip Sarlo, 26, of Joseph
Avenue in Willow Brook, S.I., was arrested in Ocala, Fla., by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation. Both men pleaded guilty to second-degree murder.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Topics of The Times;
A Salisbury Scoop

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


A great journalist can take the most unpromising subject and turn it into
page-one news. An incident in the long career of Harrison Salisbury, who died
last week at 84, splendidly makes the point.

Having earned his reputation by covering Stalin's Russia for The New York Times,
Mr. Salisbury was summoned home in 1954 to cover local news. In an initiation
rite meant to take him down a peg, an editor asked him to write about New York's
chronic failure to keep streets and parks clean.

As recounted by Gay Talese, Mr. Salisbury decided to develop this into a major
series on trash and garbage.  With his usual restless energy, he dug into his
subject, discovering that on certain days 9,675 city cleaners collected 16,402
tons of refuse, or four and a half pounds for each New Yorker. He opened his
story, inimitably:

"No city in the world comes within ten million dollars of spending what it costs
New York each year to keep clean. And no great city of the world, with the
possible exception of a few in Asia, has a greater reputation for dirt,
disorder, filth and litter. Why?"

It was a page-one report, the first of a three-part series, as one might expect
from a self-starting journalist of remarkable range. He braved police threats
and a landmark libel suit in exposing racism in Birmingham, Ala., "enforced by
the whip, the razor, the gun, the bomb, the torch, the knife, the mob." Six
years later, in 1966, Mr. Salisbury courted the wrath of Lyndon Johnson by
reporting accurately from Hanoi that Vietnamese civilians were killed by
"surgical" American raids.

Whether as reporter or historian, political analyst or editor, Mr. Salisbury
made the most of his talents and of the stories he covered.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Bit Too Much Ado About the School Prom

SECTION: Section 9; Page 10; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 267 words


To the Editor:

Perhaps as someone whose high school years were framed by Woodstock and the
winding down of the Vietnam War and whose class opted not to have a prom, I
cannot understand the significance of the event. Yet as a resident of a Long
Island community similar to the one in your article ("Prom: The Production,"
July 4), with children soon approaching what appears to be the age of insanity
around here, I am forced to comment.

Initially, the article left me disgusted that teen-agers are spending more money
than any of them has likely ever earned to make themselves look like high-end
call girls. I was also embarrassed that the stereotypical Jewish American
Princess is still alive and well and living on Long Island.

On a deeper level, I was saddened that in these days of rampant teen-age sexual
activity and frighteningly high H.I.V.-positive testings, not one of these girls
went to the prom with "a date" in the romantic sense. The guys were just another
accouterment, something to go with the hair, the nails and the dress.
Apparently, "What's Love Got to Do With It?" is not just Tina Turner's song.

Finally, I was angry at the parents who stood by silently, acting as
handmaidens, photographers and cash machines while their children engaged in
this madness.

I am angry because I know that in a few years I am going to have to compete with
people like these and it will be hard not to look like the bad guy to my
children when I draw the line and they respond with "But all the other kids'
parents are letting them!"

DORETTA KATZTER GOLDBERG
Great Neck, L.I.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Ends Asia Trip at Korea's Demilitarized Zone

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: PANMUNJOM, Korea, July 11


Seeking to underscore the economic and security concerns that now define the
relationship between the United States and its Pacific allies, President Clinton
ended a six-day trip to Asia today by visiting one of the most menacing vestiges
of the cold war -- the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.

Mr. Clinton's visit to Japan and South Korea, which revolved around last week's
meeting of the leaders of the seven richest industrialized democracies, was part
economics primer and part military maneuver for a President who won election by
emphasizing his country's domestic needs.

Mr. Clinton used the occasion to address some of the 36,000 American troops
stationed in South Korea in a speech intended to build the President's stature
by demonstrating through words and pictures that he can be an able Commander in
Chief even though he never served in uniform.

Tough Talk and a Saxophone

He courted the soldiers with tough talk about American security and patriotism,
and then performed an impromptu riff on a saxophone borrowed from a member of
the Army band. He drew his biggest cheer when he mentioned his decision last
month to order a missile attack on Iraq in retaliation for what the White House
said was a plot to assassinate President Bush.

President Clinton's two-day visit to South Korea was devoted almost entirely to
demonstrating to Seoul and Tokyo that Washington was committed to stopping North
Korea from building nuclear weapons.

"When you examine the nature of the American security commitment to Korea, to
Japan, to this region, it is pointless for them to try to develop nuclear
weapons," Mr. Clinton said today. "Because if they ever use them, it would be
the end of their country."

In several speeches during his trip, Mr. Clinton has talked about the creation
of a new Pacific community that will link American economic and security
interests. The Administration has offered no specifics on this proposal, but it
seems to be aimed, at least in part, at building a bridge of good intentions
between Asia and North America and the European Community.

Tough Stance on Nuclear Treaty

At the demilitarized zone, Mr. Clinton stared across the border into North Korea
and pledged to "stay strong" on his insistence that North Korea not go through
with its threat to withdraw from the the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear
weapons.

"Some day this will all be one country again," he said.

"I hope someday they'll just be able to walk on over here, in peace," he said of
the North Korean soldiers.

Later, at Camp Casey, an Army base near the demilitarized zone, Mr. Clinton was
cheered by thousands of soldiers of the Second Infantry Division when he praised
them for serving "on the frontier of freedom." His remarks were delivered in a
hangar decorated with hundreds of yards of camouflage netting, flags and two
signs reading: "The Warrior Division welcomes the Commander in Chief."

The only soldiers allowed to talk to reporters were selected by base commanders
in an apparent effort at public relations control that was missing when Mr.
Clinton toured the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt off the coast of Norfolk,
Va., last year. Then, he was openly criticized by a number of military people
who were unhappy about his opposition to the Vietnam War and his pledge to lift
the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.

G.I.'s Advised to Behave

The soldiers who gathered for Mr. Clinton's visit today were advised on how to
behave in advance. "Anytime during this speech, it's all right to drown out this
microphone," Sgt. Maj. Robert Hall announced before the President arrived. "It's
O.K. to raise the roof on this building."

It is the monsoon season here, and Mr. Clinton's trip to the border was hampered
by torrential rain that forced him to travel to Panmunjom by motorcade instead
of by helicopter.

The rain, however, did not diminish the theatricality of the President's visit.
Passing rice paddies and saluting guards, Mr. Clinton stepped onto the short
concrete bridge that is blocked off at North Korea's end by a six-foot
cinderblock wall as North Korean sentries stood on the other side.

"I looked at them and they were looking at us," Mr. Clinton said afterward. The
North Koreans, he added, "have been rather calm in response to my trip here, and
that is rather encouraging."

'Bridge of No Return'

Mr. Clinton walked to the middle of the "Bridge of No Return." As he stopped
about 30 yards from the North Korean border, Army officials said he became the
only American President to come so close to the enemy territory, where North
Korean sentries watched his every move.

President Reagan visited the demilitarized zone in 1983 and President Bush came
last year. Today, Mr. Clinton combined Mr. Reagan's talent for the compelling
backdrop and Mr. Bush's taste in music. Dozens of soldiers dressed in camouflage
sat in camera range behind Mr. Clinton during his speech. And beforehand, a
soldier sang the Bush campaign standard, "I'm Proud to Be an American."

North Korea alarmed many countries in March when it announced that it would
withdraw from the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons. North Korea has
since "suspended" its withdrawal, and is to continue talks with the United
States. But Japan has indicated that it could not yet support the indefinite
extension of the treaty, which expires in 1995.

American officials have said on Mr. Clinton's trip that the United States is
prepared to lead its allies -- and perhaps China -- into imposing economic
sanctions on North Korea. But Mr. Clinton also talked with South Korea's
President, Kim Young Sam, about the pace of the negotiations with the North.
South Korea has a robust trade relationship with China, established only last
August, that could be influenced by the nuclear weapons issue, illustrating the
related nature of the concerns Mr. Clinton must address in coordinating his
policies on Asia.

                             --------------------


Clintons Rest in Hawaii

HONOLULU, July 11 (Special to The New York Times) -- After leaving South Korea,
President Clinton arrived here today for a brief vacation that began with a
visit to the U.S.S. Arizona memorial at Pearl Harbor. Mr. Clinton and his wife,
Hillary Rodham Clinton, were greeted when they landed here by their daughter,
Chelsea, who presented her parents with leis as they stepped off Air Force One.
The Clintons are expected to remain here until early Wednesday.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton borrowed a saxophone from the band while
visiting American troops in South Korea. (Associated Press)

Map of North and South Korea.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Accidentally in the Path of Package Bomber, 23 Lives Are Indelibly Changed

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif.


Shrapnel from a homemade bomb tore through Hugh Campbell Scrutton's heart in a
windswept parking lot here in 1985, and the computer store owner cried for God's
help as he died beside a Dumpster.

Earlier that year, a similar explosion at the University of California at
Berkeley blew the fingers off Capt. John E. Hauser's right hand, ending the
flying career of the ambitious young Air Force pilot and engineering student and
shattering his dream of becoming an astronaut.

Three years before that, Diogenes J. Angelakos, an engineering professor at
Berkeley, lost something equally valuable to him when an explosive contraption
went off in the same university building. After surgery to repair the tendons of
his right hand, Mr. Angelakos could no longer cook, clean or change the bed
linens for his ailing wife, who died of cancer a month later.

These three men were victims of a bomber who has practiced his deadly handiwork
from coast to coast but nowhere more tragically than here in the Bay Area.
Interviews with victims, relatives, witnesses and law-enforcement officials
offer a detailed look at the bomber's meticulous craft, the blood and terror he
has left behind and the frustrating cul-de-sacs that investigators have
followed.

Four of the 14 bombs he built went off in this area, another was mailed from
here and the only communication linked to all 14 of his bombings was postmarked
here.

Meticulous Work

Mr. Scrutton, Mr. Hauser and Professor Angelakos were all accidental targets of
the bomber, people who happened upon a package that bore no address. Yet each of
the 23 victims and their families were indelibly changed.

"This guy has affected so many lives," said Mr. Angelakos, who is now 74 and was
recently summoned from retirement to serve as acting director of the Electronics
Research Laboratory at Berkeley. "How can one guy do that?"

Also scarred, if only emotionally, by the man called Unabom are the
law-enforcement officials here who have wrestled with the mystifying cases:
Detective Bob Bell and retired Lieut. Ray Biondi from the homicide unit of the
Sacramento Sheriff's Office and Lieut. William P. Foley, the commander of the
bomb squad on the Berkeley campus.

These men continue to pore over loose-leaf binders of evidence. They continue to
toss and turn at night, considering and rejecting theories. And with the latest
bombings, which produced substantial new evidence and heightened Federal
interest, they are hopeful that a solution may be in sight.

"We're jazzed, we're juiced, we're ready," Detective Bell said.

Bomb Left in Break Room

The bomb that injured Mr. Angelakos exploded at 7:47 A.M. on July 2, 1982, in
the coffee break room on the fourth floor of Cory Hall, home of Berkeley's
engineering and computer science departments.

The device was cylindrical, studded with gauges and dials, and had wires running
up its sides attached to a handle. There was construction going on in the
building at the time and Mr. Angelakos said that his "first thought was that a
contractor had left it."

The professor reached for the handle, which put tension on the wires and caused
a pipe bomb inside to detonate. Below the pipe bomb, at the base of the
cylinder, was gasoline, which failed to vaporize and thus did not ignite into a
fireball.

The custodian at Cory Hall, Ricky Timms, told the police that he had seen an
unfamiliar man in the corridor nearby and speculated that he might have placed
the bomb.

Court files include a police sketch prepared with the custodian's help. But for
sunglasses and a hooded sweatshirt, the man, fair-skinned and with a narrow
mustache, looks very much like the person seen placing a similar bomb in the
parking lot behind a Salt Lake City computer store in 1987.

Amid the debris of the bomb that injured Mr. Angelakos was a scrap of paper with
these words: "Wu -- It works! I told you it would. R.V." Lieutenant Foley said
that 1,000 fruitless hours were spent trying to interpret that message. Experts
in codes were consulted, as were members of the university's English department
who might see a veiled literary reference.

The device that maimed Mr. Hauser was superficially different from the one that
injured Mr. Angelakos. It resembled a loose-leaf binder, attached by a rubber
band to a plastic file-card box, the sort of thing a graduate student might tote
from classroom, to laboratory, to library.

It had been on a table in room 264 at Cory Hall, a computer room, for several
days before Mr. Hauser grew curious enough to open the binder at 1:41 P.M. on
May 15, 1985. That movement activated a switch.

According to police reports, "all the fingers and thumb on the right hand were
violently amputated." Mr. Hauser's bicep muscle was also torn to shreds. Mr.
Angelakos was one of the first on the scene to help Mr. Hauser, who was an Air
Force captain at the time, studying for a master's degree in engineering.

After the bombing, Mr. Hauser endured a lengthy rehabilitation and taught
himself to write with his left hand. A year behind schedule he completed his
degree. He then won a fellowship for work at Berkeley and was medically
discharged from the Air Force.

Mr. Hauser, now 34, taught engineering at the University of Southern California
until last year and is now a professor at the University of Colorado at Boulder.

Despite his crippling injuries, Mr. Hauser is a buoyant fellow. "When you're
faced with something you have to overcome, what are your options?" he said in a
telephone interview. "People pat you on the back and say, 'Oh poor you,' for a
while, but you eventually have to pick up, set a course and find something
interesting to do."

That was not an option for Mr. Scrutton. Mr. Scrutton, 38, was on his way to an
appointment shortly after noon on Dec. 11, 1985, when he stepped out the rear
door of his computer rental company in a mall here and nearly tripped over a
package.

Inside was a bomb. It exploded as Mr. Scrutton bent over it and he caught the
blast in his chest.

"Oh my God, help me," Mr. Scrutton cried out, witnesses said, as employees from
his store, RenTech Computer Rental, and other adjacent businesses rushed to his
aid.

First on the scene was an employee from a nearby software store and a customer,
who had served in Vietnam as a medic. They administered CPR. It was too late. A
half-hour after the blast, Mr. Scrutton was dead.

The employees at the software company described what they knew of the bombing on
the condition that they not be identified because they fear the bomber's return.

Theirs is a concern common in Sacramento these days.

A letter to The New York Times, claiming credit for the series of bombings and
authenticated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, bore a Sacramento
postmark. And the city has been further tied to the two recent explosions, which
injured a geneticist from the University of California at San Francisco and a
computer scientist at Yale University.

Both of those bombs, addressed to the victims, bore Sacramento postmarks and
fictitious return addresses of professors at California State University at
Sacramento.

Lieutenant Biondi and Detective Bell wonder if the bomb that killed Mr. Scrutton
was intended for someone at California State University, less than a mile from
RenTech.

The investigators have traveled to Texas and Colorado to interview suspects.
Both proved false leads. They have checked lists of Mr. Scrutton's customers,
transfer students at the university, absentee ballots and airline flight
reservations, to no avail. Physical evidence in their case was scarce because
20-mile-per-hour winds had scattered it.

"I can't stress the amount of work that's gone on," Detective Bell said.

He has gathered everything he and Lieutenant Biondi know in 17 black loose-leaf
binders, which sit on the top bookshelf in the homicide bureau here. After the
most recent bombings, Detective Bell pulled the binders down in anticipation of
a break in the case.

Does that mean he thinks the bomber is here in Sacramento?

"I would love it," Detective Bell said.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In 1982, a bomb maimed Diogenes J. Angelakos, left, a professor
at Berkeley. (George Olson for The New York Times); In 1985, Capt. John E.
Hauser lost his right-hand fingers to a bomb, ending a flying career. (Michael
Lewis for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Disputes P.O.W. Source

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 11


Denying again that it had held any American prisoners of war after 1973, Vietnam
presented three retired Vietnamese colonels who tried to discredit a source of
reports to the contrary. But a visiting United States Senator said he would
continue to investigate reports that prisoners were still being held.

"We have evidence to the contrary and we just have to pursue it," Senator Robert
C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican, said at a news conference after a four-day
trip to investigate reported sightings of American P.O.W.'s.

After Senator Smith left, the retired Vietnamese officers held a news conference
at which they tried to discredit reports by Robert R. Garwood, who accompanied
Mr. Smith to Vietnam. Mr. Garwood asserts that as a Marine private he was held
by the Vietnamese from 1965 to 1979 and that he saw several American prisoners
in 1977.

However, one of the Vietnamese officers, Nguyen Thai, said that in 1967 Mr.
Garwood asked to remain in Vietnam after he was offered freedom.

"We were ordered by the upper level that if he didn't want to go to the United
States, he might be integrated into Vietnamese society," Mr. Thai said, adding
that Mr. Garwood was regarded "not as a U.S. prisoner but as a U.S. associate of
the Vietnamese people, not an enemy." The three retired officers said Mr.
Garwood had worked on propaganda directed against American troops. After Mr.
Garwood returned to the United States in 1979, he was convicted of collaborating
with the enemy.

Earlier, Senator Smith, who had visited several areas where American prisoners
were reportedly seen after the United States withdrawal in 1973, said that
information from Mr. Garwood had checked out and that the credibility of other
sources had been enhanced.

In response, Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai said at the news conference with
Senator Smith that "there's no proof whatsoever that there were prisoners and
particularly prisoners still alive and being kept in Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 213 words


LIZ TROTTA , the former NBC and CBS news correspondent, is returning to her
roots today -- in the world of print journalism. She will be the first New York
bureau chief for The Washington Times.

Ms. Trotta left her last newspaper job, on Newsday, in 1965 and became a
correspondent for NBC, where she did three tours of duty in Vietnam and a stint
as bureau chief in Singapore. In 1978, she joined CBS as a national
correspondent, staying there until 1985. She later taught at the S. I. Newhouse
School of Public Communications at Syracuse University and at New York
University and wrote a book, "Fighting for Air: In the Trenches With Television
News," that was published in 1991 by Simon & Schuster.

"That was a completely lonely time," she recalled the other day. "There was no
one around while I was writing my book, no one telling jokes. I didn't get to go
out with the boys or to Timbuktu at 2 A.M."

Now, as the head of the bureau and the only person in it, she will again have
contact with the outside world as she peruses news of politics, sports, Broadway
and the like.

"I do feel as if I have come full circle," she said. "I can read again. I used
to read all the time before I got into television, but during those years all I
read was prompters."

NAME: LIZ TROTTA

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MIDWEST FLOODING: On the Mississippi;
Bewildered but Determined After Flood Swallows Town

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1605 words

DATELINE: WAYLAND, Mo., July 12


Donald Young remembers the four telephone calls he made, and how in 20 minutes
20 people, and then 40, arrived to help. He remembers pulling the clothes out of
the closets and packing away the crystal, the family photographs, his wife's 400
cookbooks. He remembers rounding up the 14 geese, emptying the grain bins,
driving out the tractors, the plows and the combine.

He remembers everything about the night the river forced him and his wife out of
the house where they had lived for 27 years -- except for this: "I can't tell
you what day it was," he said today. "All I can tell you is that the river stage
was 26 when we left."

Time Halted at 5:40

Donald and Geneal Young returned to their farm on Sunday to survey the damage,
riding in a boat across the river that used to be their fields of corn and
soybeans. The crops, all 1,200 acres -- about one-and-a-half Central Parks --
were gone. Stalks of corn that just six days ago had been ready to tassle had
floated into the house and now drifted from room to room in murky, calf-deep
water.

It was eerily still. The clock on the wall in the kitchen had stopped, at 20
minutes to 6. And so, in a way, has time stopped for the Youngs, and the 415
other people from what was once Alexandria but is now a town of sunken trailers
and houses and drowned fields. Seven miles from Wayland and about 190 miles
upriver from St. Louis in the northeast corner of Missouri, Alexandria has been
reachable only by boat since last Wednesday.

Fought a Good Fight

After 11 days of fighting the converging Mississippi and Des Moines Rivers, of
filling, tying and throwing thousands of sandbags, of cooking and carrying food
to the sandbaggers, people here are so dazed they can't tell you what day it is.
It will be weeks before they can even think about trying to clean up what might
be left of their homes. No one had flood insurance; it was too high to even
think about. And the rain keeps coming down.

When did the last levee break? The Alexandria refugees can't say for certain.
Geneal (pronounced Jeh-NEAL) Young says it may have been last Wednesday. Don
Fowler, a boiler operator at Hubinger's corn products factory in Keokuk, Iowa,
across the river, guesses it was Tuesday.

"We fought it hard," Mr. Fowler said. "We left fighting. We did everything
humanly possible, I do believe."

Mr. Fowler was talking as his friend Bob Schreck drove his boat past what used
to be Mr. Fowler's double-wide trailer a block from the Mississippi; now, only
the roof was showing. They went past the Alexandria post office, the general
store, the two churches, one Presbyterian, the other Baptist, and the two
taverns, the Purple Cow and the Water Hole -- all submerged. The water was up to
the stained-glass windows of the Presbyterian church; only the cross of the
Baptist church was visible. The water was so high that the two men had to duck
as the boat floated under utility wires.

It is the river stage that rules the lives of people in Alexandria. Six or seven
feet high is considered a good level for farming. Two feet is a drought, too low
for boats to get through on the Mississippi. Sixteen feet is a flood. At a
meeting today at the Wayland Fire Hall, the fire chief, Randy Ewart, announced
that the river was at 28 feet, and getting higher.

Before the flood, the population of Wayland was 498. Now it is about 900:
Wayland has taken in the town of Alexandria. Volunteers serve three good hot
meals a day at the fire station. The Clark County Sheriff, Don Barry, a former
Green Beret who completed five tours in Vietnam and says the Mekong Delta
prepared him for the Mississippi, has set up a flood emergency command post in a
trailer there. Red arrows mark levee breaks on a map on the wall. A sign reads,
"We Won't Give Up."

A shelter was opened at the elementary school, but no one slept there last night
because everyone had been offered a bed in someone's home. Don and Geneal Young
are staying with Mr. Young's elderly uncle, Russell Young.

"Unfortunately, his wife is in the hospital, and she isn't coming home," Mrs.
Young said as she stood at the kitchen sink, cleaning raspberries from the
uncle's garden. "We're giving each other moral support."

Her husband, 61, who has an open, sunburned face and muscular arms, is a
third-generation farmer. He has survived grain embargoes, droughts and other
floods. Last year, he said, was the first good year after seven bad ones. "It
challenges me," he said. "Isn't a flood a challenge? I lost, but I'll win next
year."

While he waits to get back on his farm, he said, he would go get a job, maybe in
construction. "I'm good at working with my hands," he said. "All farmers are."

Love of River Endures

Perhaps some are still in shock, but these are stoical people. As Bob Schreck
steered his boat through her ruined garden, and up to her front door, Mrs.
Young, known for her fine cooking, said, "You're welcome to come in if you'd
like a cup of tea."

Slogging barefoot through the water, Mrs. Young offered a tour of the house
where she and her husband had raised two children. "This was our office," she
said. "We used to have a roll-top desk in here. And this was our bedroom."

Even now, people say, they love the river. Floyd Smeltzer, a commercial
fisherman and a barber, has lived for 72 years in a house one block from the
river in Alexandria. "I love the vibrations of the boats," he said, standing
around at the fire station before lunch. "If it's down the river a mile, I can
tell what kind of boat it is. I have webbed feet. Get me up on a hill, and my
feet crack."

A booming port city in the early 20th century, Alexandria had never recovered
from the 1947 flood. But Mr. Smeltzer, a former mayor, says things were just
starting to get better. Two years ago, the dirt roads were blacktopped. The new
$38,000 community center, built by the townspeople, was nearly complete.

Now the roads and the community center are under 10 feet of water, and Mr.
Smeltzer's barber shop is gone, his house submerged.

'The River Had a Reason'

Still, Mr. Smeltzer and most of his neighbors, some of whom left only after the
sheriff threatened to arrest them, talk only of returning to Alexandria. "It
just happened," said 53-year-old Georgia Roberts, who makes weather stripping at
a rubber factory and had been the chief cook during the town's battle against
the river. "The river had a reason. Maybe this is the time it needed to change
its bed. I always say the good Lord does not give you more than you can handle."

The one Mrs. Roberts worries about is her mother. "She's 83," she said. "She had
a trailer. She lost everything she owned. Do you know how hard it is to start
over at 83? I'm 53. I have a chance."

To live near the Mississippi is to know that there could always be a flood.

"It's like people who live with freeways," said Mr. Schreck, of Wayland, as he
drove his boat past the homes of the Mayor and the postmistress. "You don't
think about it till there's a 100-car pileup."

And so it was that one of the younger flood victims, 12-year-old Nick Denning,
could say over a game of checkers at the fire hall: "This is my first flood.
They tell me this one is the worst."

Driving to their friend Mary White's house on Saturday night, the Youngs were
caught in a blinding thunderstorm. "More rain," Mr. Young said. "Let her rip."

"What else could go wrong?" Mrs. Young said. "Lightning could strike our house."
All they could do was laugh.

At Mrs. White's house they watched the video about the 1947 flood that the Girl
Scout troop Mrs. White leads had recently put together. The pictures looked like
Alexandria today; only this time the water is at least a foot deeper. The flood
damage for the area, according to the video, was $75,000. Mr. Young looked at
his wife beside him on the sofa. "We lost more than that ourselves this time,"
he said.

Mr. Young's father, Leslie Young, who is 88 and lives across the river in
Argyle, Iowa, was one of those who had been interviewed on camera. So were
Alfred and Hazel LeMaster.

Sunday morning the three old-timers were at the United Methodist Church in
Wayland. "We had an inch and three-quarters last night, on top of an inch and
three-quarters the night before," said Leslie Young, who looked dapper in a tan
fedora. "I'm not going to cry about it. I just don't have any control over it."

Now, as in 1947, the LeMasters have lost everything. "When I was a kid I lived
on the river," said Mr. LeMaster, who is 78 and recently had open-heart surgery
and a bypass operation. "I know when to go. That's some of God's work, that
rain."

Mrs. Young, who is the Sunday school superintendent and has been bolstering the
spirits of everyone around her, greeted her friends with a broad smile. Then,
suddenly, she was weeping, and trying to explain. For days people had been
feeding her and her husband, leaving home-baked pies at the house where they are
staying and offering clothing and prayers. "It's the goodness of all these
people," she said. Her father-in-law put his arm around her.

The new minister, Russell Branch, began to speak: "Lord, we have been writing a
new book about all the things that have happened to us this past week." He
reminded everyone that 62-year-old George Buschling, of Wayland, was home, after
five bypasses, though "he's probably not as ornery as he used to be."

After church, the Youngs headed back to the fire station, a few blocks away. It
was Sunday: There was fried chicken for lunch. The hard part, everyone here
says, will be in the months ahead, when the cleanup begins.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Donald and Geneal Young surveying the damage to their home in
Alexandria, Mo., as one of their many cats watched from the roof. All the crops
on their 1,200-acre farm were destroyed. The other 415 residents of Alexandria,
now reachable only by boat, were also evacuated.; John and Sandra Denning with
their 5-month-old daughter, Amanda, at the Wayland Fire Station in Wayland, Mo.,
where they and the other residents of Alexandria have been able to get three hot
meals a day. (Photographs by Monica Almeida/The New York Times); Riverboats
moored in the Mississippi River in St. Louis. (Associated Press) (pg. A17)

Chart: "The Midwest Flooding"

Workers in Missouri tried to strengthen a levee keeping the Mississippi and
Missouri Rivers from joining forces, and the ban on shipping on the Mississippi
was extended south to the mouth of the Ohio River at Cairo, Ill. About 250,000
residents of Des Moines remained without safe drinking water and flood waters
crippled sewage plants in other cities. Rainfall figures are for the 24 hours
ending 7 A.M. yesterday.

ILLINOIS

Deaths: 1
Rainfall: 0.47 inches
People evacuated: 10,200
Counties declared state disaster areas: 26 of 102
Area flooded: More than 30,000 acres

IOWA

Deaths: 4
Rainfall: 0.91 inches
Homes evacuated: 7,500
Counties declared state disaster areas: 52 of 99
Areas flooded: Des Moines, Ames and other riverside areas

MINNESOTA

Deaths: 3
Rainfall: 0.04 inches
Homes evacuated: 1,100
Counties declared state disaster areas: 23 of 87
Transportation: Three bridges in Minneapolis-St. Paul closed
Area flooded: Southern third of the state

MISSOURI

Deaths: 14
Rainfall: 0.18 inches
Homes evacuated: 7,500
Counties declared state disaster areas: All 114
Transporation: Two of three Amtrak lines stopped
Area flooded: 500 square miles

SOUTH DAKOTA

Deaths: 1
Rainfall: none
Homes evacuated: 725
Counties declared state disaster areas: 17 of 67
Areas flooded: 20 counties

WISCONSIN

Deaths: 1
Rainfall: 1 inch
Homes evacuated: 1,250
Counties declared state disaster areas: 37 of 72

(pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

James Peck, 78, Union Organizer Who Promoted Civil Rights Causes

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


James Peck, a union organizer and pacifist who became widely known as a civil
rights worker in the 1960's, died yesterday at Walker Methodist Nursing Home in
Minneapolis, where he had lived for about eight years. He was 78 and formerly
lived in Manhattan.

The cause of his death was not clear, said his son Dr. Charles Peck, who added
that his father had been paralyzed on one side since a stroke 10 years ago.

For more than four decades, Mr. Peck, known as Jim, promoted a variety of social
causes. His activities included pro-union work among seamen in the 1930's,
detention as a conscientious objector in the 1940's, civil rights demonstrations
in the South in the 1960's and envelope-stuffing on behalf of Amnesty
International in the 1980's.

In a 1983 interview, not long after his stroke, he said: "My life has been
nonviolent direct action to try to make this a better world. It is my philosophy
that the struggle has to be a non-ending one, because I am not one of those
idealists who envision a utopia."

Beaten in Alabama

Mr. Peck, who was white, was an early member of the Congress for Racial
Equality, which is based in New York. He was on its national action committee
and for more than a decade edited one of the civil rights group's publications.

In 1961 he and other CORE members participated in a "freedom ride" from
Washington to Mississippi to test a Supreme Court ruling that prohibited
segregation on interstate buses. When the group got off their bus in Birmingham,
Ala., they were severely beaten with clubs by about 20 white men.

Mr. Peck's face was "a mass of blood," said the television journalist Howard K.
Smith, who was in Birmingham on assignment for CBS News. More than 50 sutures
were needed to close his wounds.

Mr. Peck was born in Manhattan, the son of Samuel Peck, a prosperous clothing
wholesaler. He grew up there and graduated from the Choate School in
Wallingford, Conn. He entered Harvard University but dropped out after his
freshman year because, as his son Charles put it yesterday, "he just decided
that the traditional life style of the establishment was not for him."

He went to Paris for a couple of years, and after that, he worked as a seaman
for several years, becoming active in the formation of what became the National
Maritime Union.

At the suggestion of Roger Baldwin of the American Civil Liberties Union, he
began working for a news syndicate that served trade union publications. He also
did volunteer work in the early civil rights movement.

Opponent of War

In 1940, he declared himself a conscientious objector and worked with the War
Resisters League before the United States entered World War II. During the war,
he was interned for more than two years in Danbury, Conn., as a conscientious
objector.

After the war, he continued to work on behalf of the league as well as CORE. In
1947 he was among demonstrators who burned their draft cards outside the White
House.

He continued his antiwar efforts during the Vietnam War, helping to organize
protests and advising young men eligible for the draft.

In 1983, a Federal judge in New York awarded him $25,000 in a suit that he had
filed in 1976, contending that the Federal Bureau of Investigation could have
prevented the attack on him in Birmingham.

He wrote three books: "We Who Would Not Kill," which came out in the 1950's,
"Freedom Ride," which appeared in the mid-1960's, and "Upper Dogs Versus
Underdog," which came out in the 1970's.

His wife of 22 years, the former Paula Zweier, died in 1972.

In addition to his son Charles, who lives in Minneapolis, Mr. Peck is survived
by another son, Samuel Peck, of Del Mar, Calif., and four grandchildren.

NAME: James Peck

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Peck (Associated Press, 1966)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Puncturing the Many Pooh-Bahs

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words



The Wish for Kings
 Democracy at Bay
 By Lewis H. Lapham
 213 pages. Grove/Atlantic Press. $22.

The self-important personalities and their courtiers who are skewered with
delight by Lewis Lapham in "The Wish for Kings" call to mind the closing line of
Mort Sahl's comic turn at the old Hungry I in San Francisco: "Is there anyone
here I haven't insulted?"

Mr. Lapham, the editor of Harper's Magazine, is impartial in his choice of
people who sully the state and the democratic order. He smites Democrats and
Republicans alike, Ross Perot (especially), the hired guns in the public
relations companies who represent Latin American dictators with the sincerity of
snake-oil salesmen, the spear carriers in the press for Washington's
powers-that-be, the cabbage-heads in high office who behave like kings.

A few themes run through the five overlapping, occasionally repetitious essays
in Mr. Lapham's book: The wealthy nobles in Washington and in American society
aren't noble characters. Instead, they're commoners who have bought their way
into court favor by hook, crook and hypocrisy. With the help of fawning
mythmakers, the big hype sold to the public in recent years is that the Kennedy
White House was Camelot and, pace Reagan, it was "morning in America" for the
plebeians. As a result of the new Versailles on the Potomac, he says, democracy
is at bay.

At the court of Louis XIV in 17th-century France, people occupied themselves
with small distinctions: those greeted at the door, those offered armchairs,
those deemed worthy of being seen off in their coaches. The author sees similar
distinctions in official Washington: those assigned Government cars, those
awarded parking spaces at National Airport, those invited to sit in the box of
the high and mighty at R. F. K. Stadium.

"Against the sum of such tremendous trifles, the question of yesterday's riot or
tomorrow's debt beat as heavily as the wings of moths," Mr. Lapham, in his
extravagant style, writes. "I can admire Washington for its trees, for its
monuments and some of its stately public buildings, but I have trouble with the
stately inhabitants. So few of them know how to laugh at their own pretension,
and so many of them mistake themselves for statues."

Mr. Lapham traces the roots of the antidemocratic court society in Washington to
the beginning of the cold war, when Europe was in ruins, Japan hadn't yet
learned how to make cars that ran well and the United States was at its zenith.
To be sure, there have been cronies, kitchen cabinets and courtiers around
almost every Administration. But, he says, the Soviet menace justified "an
always larger ruling class and the demand for always larger sums of money, and
for 40 years the patriotic hymn in Washington was scored for trumpets and
muffled drums -- more weapons, more power, more secrecy, more marble, more
wiretaps, more grandeur."

President John F. Kennedy helped to promote the "national security state," Mr.
Lapham writes, and a succession of Presidents waged undeclared wars from Vietnam
to the Persian Gulf. In "The Courtier Spirit," the book's most biting essay,
officials around Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan
and George Bush are described as American royalists who later profited from the
cold war by setting up their own private baronies. As a leading example, the
author mentions former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, whose "entire
career," he writes, "illuminates the character of the courtier spirit -- a
smiling but invariably treacherous man willing to sacrifice any moral scruple on
the altar of his own ambition."

In "The Wish for Kings," Mr. Lapham's Washington resembles the town of Titipu in
"The Mikado" as seen by Ko-Ko, the Lord High Executioner. On the voluminous
Lapham "little list" of society offenders who "never would be missed" are former
Vice President Dan Quayle and his moralisms; David Brinkley and his
condescending television commentary; the former national security adviser
McGeorge Bundy of Vietnam War hawk fame; the Republican Senators who supported
Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court; Justice Thomas himself, "who revealed
himself to be a man who despised the theory as well as the practice of
democratic government"; Jeane Kirkpatrick, former United States Ambassador to
the United Nations, "finding something pleasant to say about this year's
congenial dictator" and, of course, Mr. Nixon, who "compounded the aura of royal
fantasy with his imitations of Ludwig, the Mad King of Bavaria."

The book also criticizes institutions and businesses that serve the grandees in
Washington's royal court, like the American Enterprise Institute, the Heritage
Foundation, the Securities Industry Association, the American Bankers
Association and, in particular, the public relations firm of Hill & Knowlton, "a
consortium of prominent influence peddlers."

Mr. Lapham may not be as subtle a wordsmith as H. L. Mencken or Gore Vidal, but
he's surely more choleric (or, if you like his outspokenness, courageous) than
any magazine editor in the United States today. While he's not big for Barbra
Streisand and other court jesters around the White House, he's willing to give
the Clinton Administration and democracy a chance to break the royal embrace. As
he puts it calmly: "For the time being at least, in the moment of profound
change at the end of the cold war, the advantage lies not with the policies of
fear and restraint but with the reaching of the human spirit."

If you happen to agree with the author's enemies' list -- and are fortunate
enough not to find yourself on it by category if not by name -- then you will
read his book of essays with pleasure. Even if you disagree, you'll still find
that his writing ranges from impassioned to eloquent. (The book, incidentally,
would be more valuable if an index were added.) In this particularly strong
season for the essay form, "The Wish for Kings" joins two other politically
centered books that deserve to be read: Mr. Vidal's "United States" and Robert
Hughes's "Culture of Complaint."

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lewis H. Lapham.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
For Him, Mideast Peace Is Simply an Obsession

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1437 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


All his adult life, Dennis B. Ross has been obsessed by the Middle East. He has
studied it, he has written speeches about it and he has helped develop United
States policy toward it.

Friends even say his favorite movies are "Lawrence of Arabia" and "The Ten
Commandments."

Mr. Ross is such a fanatic about Middle East peace efforts that it does not even
matter whether he is working on it for a Republican administration or a
Democratic one. He has done both.

As a chief aide to James A. Baker 3d when he was Secretary of State, Mr. Ross
played a central role in persuading Israel and its Arab neighbors to start peace
talks in October 1991. Except for the Camp David negotiations in 1978, they were
the first face-to-face Israeli-Arab peace talks since the Jewish state was
founded in 1948.

Now, as the newly named Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
the 44-year-old Mr. Ross is trying to keep those talks from falling apart.

More Than an Expert

But Mr. Ross's passion has made him something more than a mere Middle East
policy expert. It has made him a quintessential Washington political survivor.

"There's nobody better on the problems and the intricacies and the history of
the peace process," Mr. Baker said. "And that what makes him so damned
valuable."

For the Clinton Administration, which, after all, hired David R. Gergen, a
prominent Republican as a senior Presidential adviser, the decision to retain
him may seem a case of opting for expertise over partisanship. But unlike Mr.
Gergen, Mr. Ross did not sit on the sidelines as a dispassionate political
commentator during the last two Presidential campaigns.

In 1988, Mr. Ross was George Bush's chief foreign policy adviser during the
Presidential campaign. After the election, he became a central adviser to Mr.
Baker, and last year, when the failing Bush campaign brought Mr. Baker back to
the White House, Mr. Ross went along too.

Criticism of Clinton

He once again joined the Bush political team, this time behind the scenes from
the White House, where he helped fuel the Republicans' attacks on Mr. Clinton's
inexperience in foreign affairs.

Keeping him on the payroll is "like conquering somebody's country and then
turning to one of their generals and saying: 'Hey, why don't you stick around?
And by the way, what do you think we should do now?' " said James Pinkerton, a
former Bush aide.

Mr. Ross's decision to work for Mr. Bush's campaigns made him the subject of
ribbing from longtime friends, several of whom are liberal Democrats. It also
made him the object of some suspicion in the Clinton transition when the idea of
retaining him in a policy-making role at the State Department was being bandied
about.

"When he went to work in the Bush campaign, I argued against it," said Terry
Friedman, who attended U.C.L.A. with Mr. Ross and is now a California Democratic
Assemblyman. "His point was that there was a more professional and more
mainstream team among Bush foreign policy advisers."

But friends and former colleagues say they are not surprised that Mr. Ross chose
to work for a President he tried to defeat. "Anybody who knows Dennis well knows
that the overriding passion in his life, other than his family and the San
Francisco '49ers, is the peace process," said Andrew Carpendale, an aide to Mr.
Ross during the Bush Administration. "In many ways his policy interests in the
peace process transcend political affiliation."

A Professor in 1980's

His obsession with the Middle East is longstanding. As a professor at the
University of California in the mid-1980's, Mr. Ross once advised a promising
student considering a specialty in Soviet affairs to go instead where "the
action is" -- the Middle East. His opposition to the Vietnam War in the late
1960's was based in part on his belief that the conflict distracted from
America's pursuit of peace in the Middle East.

And serving different political masters is nothing new for Mr. Ross. In high
school he was a volunteer in the 1968 campaign of Robert F. Kennedy. In 1972 he
was director of field operations in the San Fernando Valley in California for
George McGovern. He was a Defense Department analyst in the Carter
Administration. But he also worked as a Middle East specialist on the National
Security Council staff in the Reagan White House.

The shifts of political loyalty made in the pursuit of his longtime interest
give rise to two views of Mr. Ross. Some see him as a talented technocrat whose
ideas are eagerly sought by leaders regardless of their political affiliation, a
kind of American version of the British permanent under secretary. But others
suspect him of being an ambitious political chameleon willing to work for anyone
so long as he is given the opportunity to exercise power and influence policy.

Some Palestinians and their supporters wonder how he can adopt what they view as
the pro-Israel coloration of the Clinton Administration after espousing a Bush
policy they considered more even-handed.

Two Different Men Seen

"The Dennis Ross under Baker and the Dennis Ross under Clinton are different,"
said Khalil Jahshan, executive director of the National Association of
Arab-Americans. "Dennis under Baker reflected Baker's perspective. Dennis under
Clinton reflects Clinton's perspective."

But supporters of Israel and the Arabs say Mr. Ross has been able to retain the
trust of both sides, partly because they sense his willingness to be candid and
blunt about any issue. In 1991, when the Bush Administration threatened to
withhold $10 billion in loan guarantees for Israel unless the Government of
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir ceased building new settlements on the West Bank
or Gaza, Mr. Ross told leaders of pro-Israel organizations in this country that
the Likud Government was alienating the American Government.

"He would say to people from pro-Israel community: 'Believe me, I stand for the
principle of close relations between the U.S. and Israel, but these guys over
there are undercutting me. This can't go on,' " said an official from a
pro-Israel group.

For all his talents, tales of Mr. Ross's disorganization are legendary.
Colleagues describe his desk as resembling Kuwait City after the Persian Gulf
war. When Mr. Baker traveled abroad, staff members often had to scurry around to
insure that Mr. Ross would not miss the motorcade. Habitually rumpled, he was
often described by co-workers as "an unmade bed."

A Creative Thinker

But colleagues also call him a creative thinker who draws on his ideas or those
of others to solve problems.  As the peace talks faltered last month, Mr. Ross
and others drafted a three-page statement of principles intended to pump some
life into the negotiations.

The paper, which has drawn criticism from both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, is aimed at getting the parties to agree on what functions of
government the Palestinians would take over from the Israelis in the occupied
territories.

He returned on Wednesday from the region, where he was assessing the possibility
of further progress and whether it would be worthwhile for Secretary of State
Warren Christopher to travel there this summer for a round of shuttle diplomacy.

He is also adept at working behind the scenes, briefing reporters on the promise
of not being quoted by name and keeping out of the spotlight. Indeed, citing the
delicacy of the Middle East negotiations, Mr. Ross declined to be interviewed
for this article.

Adviser on the Soviets

During Mr. Baker's tenure as Secretary of State, Mr. Ross was a valued counsel
on the former Soviet Union as well. He originated the concept of using Soviet
cooperation on regional issues to "test" whether Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the
former Soviet leader, was serious about reform. Indeed, Mr. Ross has pushed the
idea of testing America's relationship with other countries so often, that
during his time in the Reagan Administration he was jokingly referred to as
"Testing, One, Two, Three."

When it came to the Soviets, the results were historic: free elections in
Nicaragua, Soviet cooperation in German unification, peace talks in the Angolan
civil war, face-to-face negotiations between Arabs and Israelis and a coalition
against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. In many of these areas Mr. Ross played
a direct role.

"For most of the one-on-one meetings I had, whether with Shamir, Shevardnadze,
Gorbachev or whoever," Mr. Baker said, referring to former leaders of Israel and
the Soviet Union, "there would be one other person there on the U.S. side, and
it would be Dennis."

NAME: Dennis B. Ross

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dennis B. Ross, right, the Administration's coordinator for the
Middle East peace talks, greeting Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin in Jerusalem.
(Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Bright and Shining Future Is Laid to Rest at Arlington

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1457 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., July 16


Amid the clip-clopping of seven white horses, the beat of drums, the shuffle of
mourners' shoes and the faint sound of a rolling caisson, Second Lieut. Lisa N.
Bryant took her last journey today, through the undulating hills of Arlington
National Cemetery. Then she was buried, a few paces from the tomb of John F.
Kennedy and the tour buses nearby.

But unlike most of her new neighbors at Grant and Roosevelt Avenues, and the 15
others interred today in what was once Robert E. Lee's front lawn, Lieutenant
Bryant was not cut down in battle, nor was she coming to Arlington after a
biblically allotted lifetime. She was a 21-year-old woman who only two months
ago graduated with honors from Princeton.

Lieutenant Bryant was killed early last Saturday morning, shot four times in the
chest and face, at what her uncle, Dr. Willie Bryant, a dentist from Spring
Valley, N.Y., described in his eulogy as a "so-called secure military base":
Fort Bragg, N.C., where she arrived last month to serve in the Army Reserve
Officers Training Corps Cadet Command.

Fellow Soldier Accused

The shots left her so mangled that at the wake held for her on Thursday night,
her coffin had to be closed.

The man accused of killing her was not some foreign enemy, but a fellow soldier
and rejected suitor who was said to have grown irate over her refusal to dance
with him.

The suspect, Sgt. 1st Class Ervin Graves, a 35-year-old native of Omaha, had
come to Fort Bragg for about two months to instruct cadets.

He has been in the Army since 1980, and for a time was an instructor at the
Georgia Military College in Columbus. He had apparently never met Lieutenant
Bryant, according to her father, until the last night of her life.

Sergeant Graves, who is married, has been charged with premeditated murder, and
is being held in the brig at Camp Lejeune, N.C.

The slaying comes at a time when the fabric of the American military has already
been tightened and frayed by the end of the cold war, changing demographics in
the ranks and political pressures. Sexual relations between soldiers is a topic
of particularly heated discussion, since the Navy's Tailhook scandal and the
debate over homosexuals in the military.

These debates had particular resonance for Lieutenant Bryant, who lived in
Fairfax, Va., came from a military family, attended Princeton on an R.O.T.C.
scholarship and wrote her senior thesis on life at Army posts.

Her father, Col. Wilbert Bryant, now retired, spent nearly 28 years in the
military, including tours of duty in Vietnam and South Korea. Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is a family friend; he
attended the wake on Thursday and his wife, Alma, was at the funeral today, as
was John W. Shannon, the Acting Secretary of the Army. Lieutenant Bryant's
uncle, Alvin Bryant, is a major general in the Army Reserve.

Another Kind of Reserve

Another kind of Army reserve was on display today, first at Arlington Cemetery's
old chapel and later at graveside. In an interview, Colonel Bryant said he had
"cried 16 buckets of tears" in the last week. But while the slain woman's
friends sobbed and wailed, her father kept his composure, his grief, outrage and
despair only occasionally evident.

He said he harbored no bitterness toward the Army, asserting that it had given
his entire family, his only daughter included, its best avenue for advancement.
But he faulted Fort Bragg, where 43,000 soldiers are stationed, for allowing
officers like his daughter and enlisted people like Sergeant Graves to mix -- a
practice discouraged elsewhere but allowed there as a concession to the large
number of transient personnel.

"It's the one thing I've asked the Army leadership to change, because you have
such a disparity in education," he said. "Especially with the large influx of
women in the military, that can cause problems."

Even harder to understand, he said, was why an enlisted man was carrying a gun,
which is allowed only if registered and even then only in a soldier's home, not
the barracks.

"The thing that is so hard to conceive is a noncommissioned officer killing an
officer on a military installation," Colonel Bryant said. "This is bizarre. I've
never heard of anything like that happening before in my life. But why my
daughter? My daughter had so much to live for."

Army officials investigating the case were unavailable for comment. "We can't
discuss the circumstances surrounding any ongoing investigation," said Sgt. 1st
Class Skip Richey, a spokesman for the Army.

Looking for an Answer

Colonel Bryant said that if Sergeant Graves is found guilty he would urge that
he be executed -- but not, he added, before confronting him. "Once he's
convicted, I'm going to look him in the eye and ask him for an answer," the
colonel said. "It's my hope that he tell me what my daughter said or did to
cause him to exhibit such a violent rage, and then snuff out her life."

In eulogies and scores of tearful conversations, friends and relatives today
recalled Lieutenant Bryant as an irrepressible woman with a radiant smile who
sent thank you notes to everyone, who sang in the Triangle Club show at
Princeton and left upbeat messages on answering machines; who worshiped her
parents and said her future husband, whoever he might be, had to be at least as
nice as her brother.

Mostly, they remember how she almost single-handedly resurrected Princeton's
cheerleader squad -- what Lieutenant Bryant herself called "my greatest
contribution to Old Nassau" -- and cheered on friends as enthusiastically as she
did football players. At this morning's memorial service, 12 of Lieutenant
Bryant's sorority sisters from Delta Sigma Theta sang "Lean on Me" a capella,
doing their best to clap to time and prop one another up simultaneously.

'The Ocean Lies Ahead'

Only two months ago, they celebrated graduation together. "We have crossed the
bridge -- the ocean lies ahead!" Lieutenant Bryant wrote to her classmates in
The Nassau Herald, the college yearbook. "Plan as if you will live forever; live
as though you will die tomorrow." Now, classmates must ponder how one of the
most popular people in their graduating class was also the first to die.

Outside the chapel, two of Lieutenant Bryant's classmates, Dominique Isaac of
Brooklyn and Janella Hinds of Baldwin, L.I., consoled each other.

"She knew who to talk to, how to get things done, and that was the best thing
about her," Ms. Isaac said. "Even though she was telling you something you might
not really like to hear, she was very diplomatic, she never put people down. One
of her favorite things to say was, 'My Mom always taught me: just kill people
with kindness.' "

Lieutenant Bryant, who was assigned to accompany visiting dignitaries around the
post, was scheduled to remain at Fort Bragg for only two more weeks before
moving to Missouri to attend the basic course for officers in the Army Corps of
Engineers. She then expected to spend three years in Germany. Ultimately, she
hoped to go into real estate development or to become an environmental lawyer.

According to eyewitnesses and press accounts, on the night of July 10 Lieutenant
Bryant went out with friends to the Stillwell Lounge, a bar on the post that is
frequented by transient personnel. It was there that she first rebuffed Sergeant
Graves. When she left the club around 3 A.M., Sergeant Graves followed her to
Hardy Hall, where both she and the sergeant were staying.

Sergeant Graves continued harassing her as she called her boyfriend from a
public telephone. Then, after she hung up, he followed her down the hall,
brandishing a .357-magnum pistol. "Please, no! Please no!" she shouted.
Neighbors awakened by her screams and the ensuing blasts found her lying in a
pool of blood.

Lieutenant Bryant grew up as an Army brat; she was born at Andrews Air Force
Base, Md., educated in part at Fort Ord, Calif., and followed her father from
England to California to Washington.

At Princeton she majored in sociology and never got a grade below a B. Her
thesis, entitled "Families Within the Fortress: A Study of the U.S. Army
Family," was in small measure reminiscence and, in much larger measure, a
critical analysis.

Her childhood, she wrote in her introduction, was a "fairy tale." But studying
the strains of contemporary Army life, she wrote, proved more difficult than she
anticipated. "It has been deeply ingrained in me that to speak against the Army
is traitorous and morally wrong," she wrote. "I feel a sense of duty to the Army
to only 'sing its praises.' However, I also have an academic obligation to tell
the truth."

She concluded her introduction with an admonition to her readers. "ENJOY!!" she
wrote.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Friends and relatives of Second Lieut. Lisa N. Bryant at her
coffin yesterday during burial services at Arlington National Cemetery. A
sergeant was accused of fatally shooting Lieutenant Bryant, 21, at Fort Bragg,
N.C. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times); Lisa Bryant was crowned Miss
Robinson in 1986 at Robinson High School in Fairfax, Va. (pg. 7);; Col. Wilbert
Bryant, retired, at the coffin of his daughter, Second Lieut. Lisa N. Bryant, at
her burial yesterday at Arlington National Cemetery. (Michael Geissinger for The
New York Times)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Admiral Crowe Chosen as Envoy to Britain

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


President Clinton plans to nominate William J. Crowe Jr., Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff under Presidents Reagan and Bush, to become Ambassador to
Britain, the White House said today.

If confirmed by the Senate, Admiral Crowe will succeed Raymond G. H. Seitz, a
career Foreign Service officer whose tour expires next spring.

White House officials said Mr. Clinton had discussed the position with Admiral
Crowe some time ago but has waited to make it official. "There's an
understanding," an official said.

The retired admiral supported Mr. Clinton in the Presidential campaign by
defending his draft record in the Vietnam War. Since the election, Admiral Crowe
has served on the President's Foreign Advisory Board.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

China Backs Off Halting Ships Owned by Russia

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, July 16


The Government apologized today for two recent incidents in which Chinese patrol
boats seized Russian vessels in international waters, and it pledged to take
steps to avoid further such confrontations.

The authorities still have not explained the attack this week on a North Korean
cargo ship that had left Hong Kong and was steaming toward its home port. The
North Korean ship was reportedly raked with machine-gun fire and boarded, but it
is unclear whether those responsible were pirates or Chinese naval officials --
or if they were one and the same.

In a growing number of episodes in the last couple of years, local Chinese
police and naval patrols, particularly in southern China, have attacked or
detained foreign ships on the high seas or in Hong Kong waters. Vietnamese ships
have been particularly vulnerable to being seized while returning from Hong Kong
to Vietnam, and they are often detained and forced to pay fines or forfeit their
cargoes.

Suspicion of Smuggling

Chinese Government patrol boats are often involved, and frequently the reason --
at least when the searches are conducted in Chinese waters -- appears to be
genuine suspicion that the ships are smuggling cars or other goods into China.
Such smuggling is widespread, although the Chinese Navy and border police
themselves seem to play a significant role in it.

On other occasions, the motivation for seizing the ships reportedly is simply
the hope of extracting a ransom, even if the cargo is legitimate.

Simple piracy also occurs, with cargo and money looted on the high seas.
Suspicion is sometimes directed at Chinese naval officers and security
officials, in part because they have access to the machine guns and fast
launches that are used in such raids.

The Government's apology today came in the form of a statement by the official
New China News Agency, which referred to the detention only of Russian vessels.
But the unusual report suggested that the Government is concerned about the
issue and trying to correct it.

China Apologized

Describing one episode, the statement said that on June 9 a Chinese
antismuggling patrol had escorted a Russian ship from the high seas into a
nearby harbor "for investigation."

"The vessel was released June 12 after it was determined that it was not
involved in contraband," the report said. It added that China had apologized to
Russia for the detention.

Then on July 7, the report said, "some local Chinese" boarded a Russian ship in
international waters while conducting an antismuggling patrol. The ship was
released after no contraband was found, the press agency said.

"The Chinese Government has always approached such matters with a serious
attitude and is taking steps to prevent the recurrence of such incidents," the
agency reported.

The admission of error came in a back-handed way, as most of the New China News
Agency report focused on Russian misconduct. The agency cited a case in which
Russian ship fled after being impounded and another in which a Russian ship was
found to be engaged in smuggling cars.

The scale of China's interference with shipping on the high seas is difficult to
gauge, in part because foreign shipowners have usually tried to settle the
disputes quietly by negotiation. But some diplomats have been concerned that
China is playing an aggressive role trying to police the high seas, and that
such episodes could affect international shipping and harm confidence in the
port of Hong Kong.

Most of the confrontations seem to have involved local naval or security
officials, and there is no indication that the central Government has approved
attacks on foreign ships in international waters.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENGAGEMENTS;
James Perlmutter and Heather Jacobs

SECTION: Section 9; Page 14; Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


Col. Jack H. Jacobs, U.S.A., retired, of London, and Karen S. Rhinehart of New
Paltz, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heather Renee
Jacobs, to James Frederick Perlmutter, a son of Alvin H. Perlmutter and
Priscilla N. Strauss, both of New York. A September wedding is planned.

Miss Jacobs, 28, is an assistant portfolio manager at Bear Stearns Asset
Management in New York. She graduated from Rutgers University. Her father, who
received the Congressional Medal of Honor in 1968 for service in Vietnam, is a
managing director of the Bankers Trust Company in London. Her mother is an
administrative assistant at the Ulster County Residential Health Care Facility
in Kingston, N.Y.

Mr. Perlmutter, 34, is a public relations manager at the Development Corporation
for Israel, the American agent for the sale of State of Israel bonds, in New
York. He graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham
University. His father is the president of Alvin H. Perlmutter Inc., a
television and film production company in New York.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Perlmutter and Heather Jacobs (Gude Photography)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Against New Odds, The U.N. Insists on Helping in Somalia

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


THE obvious question last week was this: Is Somalia, where first the United
States and then the United Nations entered with such good intentions and high
hopes, turning into a quagmire?

Put more starkly: Are the ongoing fighting in southern Mogadishu, the hostility
of the local population, the dissension among the international contingents of
troops, the failure to capture the renegade warlord who is causing the trouble
and the killing of four journalists by mobs, all signs that Somalia is turning
out to be the U.N.'s Vietnam -- easy to get into, hard to get out of, very
costly and, perhaps, unwinnable?

What was striking at U.N. headquarters last week was how determined the mood
was, despite all the troubling news from Somalia. The determination survived an
untoward event, an open threat by Italy, which has 2,700 troops in Somalia, the
third largest contingent, to withdraw. The threat came after the United Nations
removed the head of the Italian troops, Gen. Bruno Loi, and sent him back to
Rome after he not only refused to obey orders from the United Nations command
but expressed disagreement with the entire philosophy of the Somalia operation.

General Loi and the Italian Government -- along with plenty of other critics
becoming more disillusioned than determined -- believe that in concentrating on
the fight against Mohammed Farah Aidid, the defiant faction leader, the U.N. is
widening the conflict, taking sides in a civil war, alienating the population
and losing sight of its original mission of delivering relief supplies and
rebuilding the country. The discord showed one thing clearly: General Aidid has
succeeded in driving at least a small wedge into the unity of the peacekeeping
force.

Still, while those problems were obviously causing worry, there was no sign that
the United Nations was rethinking its mission or that a mood of pessimism was
overtaking the Somali operation.

New Kind of Mission

The feeling was that General Aidid, the Italians, the violence and everything
else were only to be expected in what is for the United Nations an entirely new
mission: not so much peacekeeping but peacemaking, involving real warfare,
police work and nation building almost from scratch.

Moreover, officials here were reiterating that the stakes were high, not just in
Somalia but in other places, like Angola and Cambodia, where the U.N. is playing
a peacekeeping role.

And, no, the argument went, Somalia is not Vietnam. There is, after all, no cold
war any more, no superpower supplying General Aidid's forces, no refuge across
some border for him, no Ho Chi Minh Trail. The Somali road may be long and
tough, it was being said here last week, but the obstacles can be overcome and
the the U.N. command's approach, including the assaults on General Aidid, is the
correct one.

"You cannot deliver assistance if it is obstructed by a thug," said the American
chief delegate, Madeleine K. Albright, expressing support for the United
Nations' basic approach in Somalia and arguing that U.N. peacekeeping -- carried
out preferably with greater skill and professionalism than in the recent past --
is an essential element of American policy in the Clinton Administration.

Ms. Albright and the United Nations Under Secretary General for peacekeeping,
Kofi Annan, both argued last week that, while matters in southern Mogadishu were
bad, that is only one part of the country. Ms. Albright was in Somalia two weeks
ago and attended a meeting of elders in the southern seaport of Kismayu, an
experience she said showed how much better the situation was in some places than
it had been before the foreign forces arrived.

"There is a great determination to press on with the political mandate," Sir
David Hannay, the British delegate and president of the Security Council said
this month. "It's not an easy mandate to carry out. It's proving frustrating and
difficult, but I have not heard anybody questioning the objective."

Over a year ago, when Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali first recommended
that the Security Council authorize a U.N. operation in Somalia, he warned that
Somalia was "extraordinarily complex" given "the absence of any civil society
and a breakdown of law and order." Secretary General Boutros-Ghali is said to
have expressed a good deal of nervousness about the amount of arms still held by
the Somali factions, and he wanted assurances that the member states, especially
the United States, were ready to lend the muscle and the money that the task
would take.

The events of recent weeks have raised new doubts about whether, in fact, there
is enough muscle and money, especially in light of the by-now-evident toughness
of General Aidid's resistance, his skill, so far, at eluding capture and his
ability to generate at least some support among the local populace.

"I think those who say the current difficulties in pacifying General Aidid's
militia is a momentary blip in an otherwise successfully proceeding operation
have come to a quick and unsubstantiated conclusion," said James Hoge, editor of
Foreign Affairs.

"We could find the U.N. bogged down in Somalia for a long time at great
expense," he said.

United Nations officials nonetheless argued last week that the present course
was the only course. Despite images on the evening news of Aidid supporters
waving their fists in the air, the U.N.'s Under Secretary General for political
affairs, James O. C. Jonah, argued last week that General Aidid's political
strength was actually limited and local. Moreover, Mr. Jonah established in a
sense the deeper meaning of things:

"If we fail in Somalia, the repercussions will be devastating," he said.  "It
would show that the U.N. cannot sustain an operation, and that is why we want to
see this effort succeed in Somalia."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Somalis trudging past a U.N. tank on their way to a heavily
guarded food distribution site in southern Mogadishu. The photographer, Hansi
Kraus of the Associated Press, was one of the four journalists killed by an
angry mob last week. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. IS TO STATION OFFICIALS IN HANOI

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 17


The United States will station diplomats in Vietnam for the first time since the
Vietnam war under a plan disclosed today by senior American and Vietnamese
officials.

The three diplomats would help the growing number of American families who visit
Vietnam seeking information about missing soldiers. There have been no United
States diplomats stationed in Hanoi since the French colonial period, which
ended in 1954; and United States diplomats left Saigon in the south in the
closing days of the Vietnam War in 1975.

The arrival of the officials should not be misread as a sign that Washington is
preparing for normal relations with Hanoi, said Winston Lord, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

But diplomats and Vietnamese officials are sure to see it that way, since it
will allow the State Department to have day-to-day contacts with the Vietnamese
Government.

The plan, proposed by the United States, was announced today in Hanoi after two
days of talks on broader cooperation in investigating the fate of the 2,253
Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina.

The 22-member United States delegation, led by Mr. Lord, was dispatched by
President Clinton earlier this month when he announced his decision to end
Washington's opposition to loans to Vietnam by international development
agencies.

Mr. Lord said in Hanoi today that he had been given a letter for President
Clinton from President Le Duc Anh that promised continued cooperation on the
M.I.A.'s. "I can tell you that it expresses great appreciation for the
President's decision on the clearing up of Vietnam's debts," Mr. Lord said.

President Clinton has said that Vietnam would have to expand its assistance in
resolving the fate of missing Americans if it wanted Washington to consider
normalizing relations. He has kept a United States trade embargo imposed when
Vietnam was unified under Communist rule in 1975.

At a news conference, Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai said Hanoi was already
offering its full cooperation in the search for missing Americans. "But of
course there will be more determination and more efforts, and that will lead to
more results," he said.

The Defense Department already has a presence in Vietnam -- investigators who
work with the Vietnamese to resolve the M.I.A. cases. American officials said
that the presence of the diplomats would free the Pentagon teams to concentrate
on the investigations.

Mr. Lord said his delegation, which included representatives of veterans'
groups, had "laid considerable emphasis" on human rights issues. "We intend to
pursue this matter, and the Vietnamese side was very open," he said.

The Vietnamese M.I.A.'s

On Friday, the United States gave Vietnam microfiche copies of Communist
documents seized during the war, to help Hanoi determine the fate of 300,000
missing Vietnamese.

Leaders of the veterans' groups said they were pleased with the promises of
cooperation, but they warned that the cooperation must be complete.

"If the Vietnamese follow through on what they've pledged, I think there will be
great cause for rejoicing," said David Givans, of the Disabled American
Veterans. "If they don't, I think it will cause irreparable harm to this whole
process."

The United States delegation arrived a week after a visit by Senator Bob Smith,
a New Hampshire Republican, who spent four days in northern Vietnam
investigating reports that some missing Americans may still be alive. Senator
Smith said he believed that some prisoners may still be somewhere in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 690 words



International 3-17

CHINESE MIGRANTS ARE SENT BACK


Soon after being brought ashore in Mexico, the first of about 300 Chinese
migrants were put on planes back to the country they had fled.  1

U.S. TO BASE ENVOYS IN HANOI

The U.S. will station diplomats in Hanoi for the first time since the war to
assist Americans seeking information about missing soldiers.  1

BRITISH JUDGES: LITTLE DIVERSITY

The British judicial hierarchy includes no women or nonwhites among the 10
judges of the Law Lords, the highest court, and no nonwhites on the Appeals
Court.  3

SAIPAN: LOW WAGES OFFERED

Asian laborers are regularly flown to Saipan, where they work at about half the
minimum wage sewing American brand-name clothes.  1

HOW MUCH REFORM IN JAPAN?

As Japanese vote, many wonder about how far they want to change a system that
made their nation the world's second-richest.  8

THE SERBIAN AND CROATIAN GOAL

Serbian and Croatian nationalists are looking beyond ethnic partitioning to
extinguish Muslims as an independent political force.  12

National 18-25

CLINTON VISITS FLOOD VICTIMS

President Clinton, meeting with officials in flood-stricken Missouri, said he
was considering mobilizing Federal troops and hinted at more money for relief.
1

FUTURE OF LEVEES IS DEBATED

As the Mississippi rages, support is growing for the idea of removing some
levees and using bottomlands as temporary flood reservoirs, just as nature
intended.  23

SESSIONS IS TOLD TO RESIGN

Clinton Administration officials told the F.B.I. Director, William Sessions,
that if he did not resign by Monday he would be dismissed.  1

QUESTIONS ABOUT CASEY'S FUTURE

After a heart and liver transplant last month, Gov. Robert P. Casey of
Pennsylvania says he cannot wait to return to work. But many wonder whether he
should return at all.  24

NEW MISSION FOR BUNKER

Built as a nerve center to trace Soviet bombers, the North American Aerospace
Defense Command has turned it weaponry on a new foe: low-flying drug smugglers.
18

A FIRST STEP FOR GAY SOLDIERS

News analysis: President Clinton's plan to allow homosexuals in the military
gives gay men and lesbians more protection and is a step toward relaxing
restrictions 18

DEBATE OVER SEX ORIENTATION

Evidence of a biological basis for homosexuality has set off a struggle to
reconcile the findings with political and personal convictions.  24

NEO-NAZI SHOCK TROOPS

The arrest of eight white supremacists comes at a time of rising violence by
skinheads, the shock troops for a neo-Nazi movement.  25

Metro 27-38

PLOT TO KILL MUBARAK

An Egyptian immigrant from New Jersey was charged in a Federal complaint with
conspiring with at least two others to kill President Hosni Mubarek of Egypt in
a "suicide mission" during his official visit to the United States in March.  1

DIFFICULTIES IN SMUGGLING CASE

Six weeks after the Golden Venture came to symbolize the crisis involving
smuggling of Chinese immigrants, the authorities have yet to locate anyone they
hold responsible for the immigrants who died in June trying to get to land.  27

TESTING GROUND FOR NEW POLICING

The most important test for New York's new crimefighting philosophy, community
policing, will come in high-crime neighborhoods like East New York, where
officers work in an atmosphere of alienation.  27

TRIBE BRACES FOR GAMBLING

The changes under way for the Oneida Indian tribe, as they prepare to open the
first legal gambling hall to operate in New York State in at least a century,
could not be more stark than if every Oneida had won the lottery.  27

A judge's errors result in high number of overturned cases.  28

Bitter campaign could mar effects of report on Crown Heights.  29

Police search for youth in connection with Brooklyn fire.  29

Elizabeth, N.J., to begin $100 million redevelopment project.  33

Obituaries 36

Jesse D. Sepulveda Jr., received heart transplant at 16 days old.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hunt Goes On for Smugglers In Fatal Trip

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


Amid the confusion on the beach at dawn on June 6, Kin Sin Lee looked like any
other of the 300 Chinese immigrants huddled in blankets after swimming ashore
from the Golden Venture, the freighter that ran aground off Rockaway Peninsula
after a journey halfway around the world.

Within hours, investigators were told that this slender, plain-looking
23-year-old had been directing operations throughout the trip, immediately
making him their main link to the organized-crime figures who planned and ran
the smuggling operation.

Yet investigators soon concluded that Mr. Lee was only an underling in a loose
hierarchy of smugglers, a man trusted to say, if caught, that he didn't even
know the full name of his boss.

Six weeks after the Golden Venture came to symbolize the emerging crisis
involving wholesale smuggling of Chinese immigrants, the authorities have yet to
find anyone they hold responsible for the death of 10 immigrants trying to get
to land that morning.

Leaders Carefully Insulated

Law-enforcement officials say the case illustrates the daunting obstacles they
face in their pursuit of the Asian crime syndicates that dominate the lucrative
business. Witnesses who are reluctant to talk, language and cultural barriers
and the careful way that smugglers insulate themselves from incriminating
evidence all make it difficult to pin down the real culprits.

Although President Clinton has vowed to crack down on smuggling and only
recently turned away three ships with 659 undocumented foreigners that neared
the coast of California, law enforcement officials say that if smugglers
continue to evade prosecution, there is little hope for preventing them from
launching more ships.

"As long as the incentive for smuggling is high, and the risk of getting caught
is low, smugglers are going to be active," said Daniel Molerio, assistant
district director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, who supervises
investigations in New York. "But it's very difficult to track them down."

Since the recent wave of ships carrying undocumented Chinese began in 1991, only
once in two dozen cases have the smugglers been caught: a ship was caught off
the coast of North Carolina last September, run by a pair of Taiwanese-American
restaurateurs in New York. Investigators say the two, George Huang of Elmhurst,
Queens, and William Chen of Plainview, L.I., left a trail of evidence that
identified them as owners of the ship, making them look like amateurs. They were
sentenced Thursday to five years in prison.

Officials say immigrant smuggling appears to be dominated by Taiwanese
businessmen who have connections in China, Thailand, Hong Kong, New York and
Central America, where they arrange ships, bribe local officials and hire gang
members to exact payments from passengers.  Competing smugglers often cooperate
on a venture, sharing the risk and the profit.

Yet in the Golden Venture case, the prosecution of immigrant smugglers will be
limited for now to the 12 men who were arrested the day the ship arrived: Mr.
Lee, Capt. Amir Tobing of Indonesia and 10 crew members. Each has been charged
with five counts of immigrant smuggling and all are scheduled to stand trial in
October.

Documents released by the United States Attorney's office earlier this month and
interviews with law-enforcement officials indicate that the investigation of the
Golden Venture is preceedingly painstakingly.

'Lot of Avenues to Pursue'

"Obviously, this didn't start with the beaching of the boat, so we've got a lot
of avenues to pursue," said Catherine E. Palmer, an expert on Asian organized
crime who is prosecuting the case in the Eastern District of New York.

Ms. Palmer expressed confidence that the Golden Venture investigation would
eventually net some large-scale smugglers. She would not comment on suggestions
by Chinatown lawyers that the Golden Venture had been run by six or more
Asian-American men, two of whom own restaurants in Queens, nor would she discuss
details of the case.

But Ms. Palmer said that obtaining evidence was a logistical nightmare, with
more than 250 passengers being held in detention in several states and few if
any of them willing to speak freely with officials lest it affect their bids for
political asylum.

Still the investigation has produced clues about how smugglers insulate
themselves with subordinates who are kept ignorant or loyal enough to insure
that if a smuggling operation goes awry, there is little to point to the real
culprits.

Trying to Emigrate Himself

In interviews with immigration agents, Mr. Lee portrayed himself as a man trying
to emigrate to the United States himself; he said he was hired in June 1991 by a
Chinese businessman in Thailand to oversee the detention of several dozen fellow
Chinese immigrants at a pair of safe houses in Bangkok.

In December 1992, Mr. Lee told investigators, he was asked by the businessman to
oversee operations on board the Golden Venture in exchange for free passage to
the United States. Mr. Lee insisted in interviews with immigration agents that
he did not know the man's full name, referring to him only as "the boss."

Mr. Lee communicated with the businessman regularly via radio from the ship,
said Captain Tobing, who told the authorities that he had been hired in Bangkok
by the same man. Yet according to the documents, Captain Tobing also said he
knew his employer only by a partial name, "Charlie." He said the employer was
from Taiwan and had a wife who lived in New York City.

"Charlie" was a familiar name to immigration agents involved in the Golden
Venture case. One investigator said that when a ship called the Nadj was
stranded in Mombasa, Kenya, with 200 undocumented Chinese in October 1992,
"Charlie" soon arrived to pay for hotel rooms and to assure the passengers that
another ship would be along soon.

'Mr. Charlie' With Money

"There was a crisis, and out of nowhere arrives Mr. Charlie with bags of money,"
said the investigator, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "He is not a
general, but a top lieutenant who has wide latitude to pay people whatever is
necessary, to make decisions to resolve any problem."

The captain told investigators that Mr. Lee spoke to "Charlie" again via radio
to arrange two separate rendez-vous with smaller ships that would ferry the
passengers to the United States. But when neither ship materialized, the
communications became more desperate as the Golden Venture approached New York.

The documents offer no conclusive evidence about the identity of "Charlie" or
any other smugglers. But the papers and notebooks found on board the Golden
Venture include tidbits of evidence that begin in Singapore, where the ship
originated.

One document is a copy of a letter from the shipping agent, Rosson Shipping,
that processed the sale of the ship, originally named the Tong Sern.

Laughed in Disbelief

Mohammed Fauzie, manager of Rosson Shipping, said in a telephone interview that
he had acted as the agent in the sale of the Tong Sern from Hiap Hoe Pvt. Ltd.
to Mr. Lee last December. He said he did not know what price had been paid for
the ship, but added that he and his colleagues laughed in disbelief when they
heard news accounts of the ship's landing in New York.

"That ship was in no way fit to cross the ocean," Mr. Fauzie said, saying that
he was told the vessel would be used to ship cargo from Thailand to Cambodia and
Vietnam.

An employee of Hiap Hoe said that the manager, Ng Choon Kok, was ill and
unavailable for questions.

Investigators also say that they suspect that Guo Liang Chi, the leader of the
Fuk Ching gang, who is known by the nickname "Ah Kay," was involved in the
Golden Venture. Mr. Guo is believed to have left the United States early this
year in the midst of a struggle with other gang members over profits from
immigrant smuggling.

Teaneck Link Suspected

The investigators say they believe there is a connection between the murder of
Mr. Guo's two brothers in Teaneck, N.J., on May 24 and the failure of any boats
to meet the Golden Venture.

Mr. Guo, who applied for political asylum in 1991 after a felony conviction for
extortion in 1986 and deportation to China in 1988, is currently appealing a
second deportation effort.

Investigators are still sifting through the hundreds of pages of documents
discovered on the ship, and checking the dozens of addresses and phone numbers
within.

"It's a morass of information," said one investigator. "This is really laborious
stuff. It's kind of like walking down a hallway with 10,000 doorways and making
sure each one is shut."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE WORLD;
Bosnia's Plight Divides the State Department

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


SECRETARY OF STATE Warren Christopher was not pleased when details from a
classified State Department paper on options for easing the misery in Sarajevo
surfaced in a news report last week. The leak was the most recent in a stream
involving classified State Department papers about Bosnia, and as one aide to
Mr. Christopher put it, "It looks bad with his colleagues that he can't keep his
people quiet."

Mid-ranking foreign service officers who work on Bosnia policy were quickly
ordered to draw up lists of colleagues who might have seen the memo. But there
was a problem. The memo had started as a working paper in the computer system,
and it could have been seen by dozens of State Department people.

Still, there was something to be learned: that there is an us-against-them
mentality at the State Department these days, an Upstairs-Downstairs divide
between the seventh floor where Mr. Christopher and his closest aides have their
offices and everyone else below. The hunt for a leaker assumed that somewhere in
the bureaucracy lurked a turncoat so intent on making the Clinton Administration
look bad that he or she was willing to violate a basic rule of diplomacy: Always
keep a secret.

Not since the Vietnam War has a policy caused so much anguish within the foreign
service. The skepticism and grumbling focus on what Sarajevo has come to
represent for these people -- the failure of their country's diplomacy to make
the world a better place.

If there is one point on which there is no disagreement, it is that Bosnia is a
thorny problem that might have been less difficult to solve had the United
States acted more forcefully much earlier. The settling in of the Democrats at
the White House and the worsening of the fighting on the ground at first raised
expectations that the United States would finally force a solution, but then
those hopes were dashed. Now, depending on who is doing the talking, Mr.
Christopher is either a hero who welcomes dissent or a villain who has closed
himself to any change of policy.

Actually, the State Department has officially encouraged unorthodox thinking
since 1971, when Secretary of State Dean Rusk set up a formal "dissent channel"
in response to widespread opposition over American policy in Vietnam. Mr.
Christopher's supporters say he has been an ardent advocate of using the channel
as the appropriate way to register protest. Last winter he met with two of the
three foreign service officers who had written a 30-page dissent that went
ignored by the Bush Administration. And he later met with a group of 12 top
experts on the Balkans who had sent him a letter calling Western diplomacy a
failure and recommending military action against the Serbs.

But Mr. Christopher has also made clear that he feels personally betrayed when
classified or privileged information finds its way into print. That was one
reason the American Embassy in Croatia did not stamp "secret" on a report last
week on the horrible conditions in Sarajevo; this way, the memo could be openly
shared with reporters.

Mr. Christopher's critics, on the other hand, believe he has been one of the
Administration's staunchest opponents of tougher action. They point to his May
19 testimony to Congress, in which he said the United States had no moral
obligation to protect Bosnia's Muslims because all three sides shared
responsibility for atrocities. (A human rights bureau official responded with a
memo reminding him that the Serbs had committed the "overwhelming majority" of
the atrocities.)

Other Issues Preferred

Mr. Christopher has also made no secret of his desire to move attention away
from Bosnia; indeed, he complained in a recent interview that Washington is a
"one-issue city," seized by "whatever dominates the headlines" and that the
issue has been Bosnia.

And some in the State Department are perplexed, pointing out that Mr.
Christopher last winter was describing as "repugnant" an international
mediators' plan to divide Bosnia into 10 ethnically-based provinces. How, they
ask, can he now say the United States could endorse a three-way partition plan
if the warring factions would agree to it -- thereby putting pressure on the
reluctant Muslim-led Government to do so?

"There's enormous frustration that American policy didn't react" in the Bush
years to prevent a tragedy, said F. A. Tex Harris, the president of the American
Foreign Service Association, who was honored by the State Department in 1984 for
having challenged previous policies toward Argentina. "People who have
first-hand knowledge and who saw a policy drift are speaking out -- but most of
them are doing it unofficially, because they're afraid they are going to be
hurt."

George Kenney, the acting desk officer for Yugoslavia who resigned over the
Bosnia policy during the Bush Administration, said there hasn't been more
dissent only because "people do worry about their jobs and their careers." Now
an unpaid fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, he added: "I
could live in my parents' basement when I left, but most people have kids and a
mortgage."

When Mr. Kenney resigned, one of those who called to congratulate him was a
college professor named Anthony Lake, who went on to become President Clinton's
national security adviser. Two decades ago, Mr. Lake himself quit his job as
Henry A. Kissinger's executive assistant after the United States bombed
Cambodia.  It is an example still pointed to by the Foreign Service Institute
when it trains young officers about the moral dilemmas involved in making
foreign policy.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 25, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about dissent within the State Department over policy
toward Bosnia misidentified the Secretary of State who established a formal
channel in 1971 to present opposing views to senior officials. He was William P.
Rogers, not Dean Rusk. Mr. Rusk took less formal steps, in the 1960's, to
encourage unorthodox thinking.


GRAPHIC: Photo: On their own: Muslim soldiers riding on the hood of their
damaged vehicle near Brcko in northeastern Bosnia. (James Nachtwey/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Captures 143 People on Boats On Way From China

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 261 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 18


Hong Kong intercepted 143 more boat people from China just after dawn today,
Government officials said.

The interception in Hong Kong waters of three vessels carrying the boat people
brought the total number of arrivals to more than 800 since a new wave started
earlier this month, the Government said. It added that the number exceded the
total for the last four years.

"It is worsening," a Government spokeswoman said. "Yesterday was 125, and this
morning was already 143."

The boat people are ethnic Chinese who fled into southern China from Vietnam in
the late 1970's and settled in the coastal town of Beihai. They say local
authorities are now demolishing their homes to make way for development.

Governor Chris Patten has urged China to take back new arrivals, who are being
treated as illegal immigrants.

                             --------------------


76 Sentenced as Smugglers



HONG KONG, July 18 (AP) -- The authorities in southern China have sent 76 people
to prison or labor camp for smuggling illegal immigrants out of the country, a
Government-run newspaper here reported today.

The smugglers were convicted on Thursday in Fuzhou, the capital of Fujian
Province, a center for immigrant trafficking to the United States and elsewhere,
said the newspaper Ta Kung Pao. It reported that 32 had been sentenced to terms
ranging from one to five years and that 44 had been sent "for re-education
through labor."

The smugglers were reported to have been caught in a monthlong crackdown on
immigrant trafficking in the province.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Refinery Plan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: TAIPEI, Taiwan, July 18


Taiwan's state-run China Petroleum Corporation and Total S.A. of France have
proposed a joint venture to build a $1 billion refinery in Vietnam, officials
said Friday. The project, pending approval by the Vietnamese Government, would
be the largest foreign investment ever in Vietnam, officials of the two
companies said. They said Total and the Taiwan company had proposed a refinery
in southern Vietnam that could process 130,000 barrels of oil a day.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
COCA-COLA BOTTLERS JOIN VIETNAM SOFT-DRINK MAKER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 108 words


The Coca-Cola Company said that two of its overseas bottlers signed a contract
yesterday for a $24.5 million joint venture with Vietnam's largest soft-drink
company to modernize its production operations. The contract, to be executed
once the United States Government economic embargo on Vietnam is lifted, was
signed in Ho Chi Minh City, Coca-Cola said in a statement. The contract is for a
joint venture between Vietnam's Chuong Duong Beverage Factory and Coca-Cola
Indochina Pte. Ltd., a joint venture between two major regional bottlers of
Coca-Cola -- F& N Coca-Cola Pte. Ltd. of Singapore and Thai Pure Drinks Ltd. of
Bangkok, Thailand.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Going Back Home, Again and Again, To Find Vietnam and to Find Herself

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


"From Hollywood to Hanoi," opening today at Film Forum, is an intense, personal,
supremely self-confident feature-length documentary that owes a lot to the
cinema journalism of Michael Moore, the man who confronted General Motors in
"Roger and Me." Like the Moore film, "From Hollywood to Hanoi" is as much about
the film maker behind it as it is about the subject it appears to be exploring.

On the surface that subject is life in Vietnam today, so many years after the
end of hostilities. In fact, "From Hollywood to Hanoi" is the record of one
remarkable young woman's efforts to construct a coherent identity out of bits
and pieces of lives lived as a series of compromises.

Tiana, who wrote, directed and produced "From Hollywood to Hanoi," was named Thi
Thanh Nga when she was born in Saigon, where her father was in charge of press
and information for the South Vietnamese Government. In 1966, when she was still
a little girl, she and her family moved to the United States after her father
became convinced that the Government cause was lost. They settled first in
Washington, where her father worked for the Voice of America, and later moved to
San Jose, Calif.


"We tried to become perfect Americans," Tiana says on the soundtrack. Her
brothers grew up to become policemen. At the age of 16, she ran away to
Hollywood to be an actress, appearing in Sam Peckinpah's "Killer Elite" in 1975,
among other films. She was also in "Pearl," the television mini-series, some
kung-fu movies playing a sort of female version of Bruce Lee, a music video made
in France and a karate video. The roles available to Asian actresses being
limited, she became increasingly obsessed by her real-life role as an
Americanized Vietnamese. Who was she?

To find out, she made the first of a series of trips back to Vietnam in 1988
over the objections of her father. She has continued to return several times a
year, always with a camera and with an insatiable desire somehow to reconcile
the two sides of her life. The initial result of these explorations is "From
Hollywood to Hanoi," the packed and layered journal of a very special innocent
abroad.

Tiana would seem to be a woman with the gift of gab, a lot of push and except
for her need to learn, a redeemingly skeptical point of view. In Vietnam there
are emotional reunions with long-lost relatives, including an uncle, a former
South Vietnamese Defense Minister recently released after 13 years in a
Government re-education camp.


There also are interviews with Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the former commander of the
North Vietnamese forces, and Le Duc Tho, who led the North Vietnamese delegation
to the Paris peace talks. It's clear that the two men were enchanted by Tiana,
whom they seem to regard as a sort of prodigal daughter returned. There are
interviews with Amerasian children whose American fathers abandoned their
Vietnamese mothers, and visits to a hospital where, in what is said to be an
Agent Orange ward, war victims still languish.

Poverty is everywhere. Though relations between Vietnam and the United States
have not returned to normal, Tiana notes that the dollar has returned to Saigon,
which is what everyone still calls Ho Chi Minh City. She attends a performance
of Tennessee Williams's "Glass Menagerie," which is played, as she describes it,
with a ferocity better suited to Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia
Woolf?" In Hanoi she meets and dances with Oliver Stone, the American film
director.


Back in the United States, at a benefit performance of "Miss Saigon," she runs
into Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the former American commander in Vietnam. She
doesn't hesitate to push a microphone into his face and ask him why, in the film
"Hearts and Minds," he said that Asians do not value human life as dearly as
people in Western civilizations do. The surprised general thought he was just
going out to see a Broadway show.

Though Tiana has included the "Hearts and Minds" clip in "From Hollywood to
Hanoi," the general at first insists that he never said any such thing, but he
goes on to explain what he really meant, none too successfully.

The film makes superb, sometimes sarcastic use of material from old newsreels
and propaganda films. Equally important, though, is the way the director
portrays her affection for her father and the other members of her family in
this country. In many ways hers is a divided family, but it also appears to be
an unusually strong and loving one. There's a lot of rich, sometimes still raw
material here.

From Hollywood to Hanoi

Written, directed and produced by Tiana (Thi Thanh Nga), in English, French and
Vietnamese with English subtitles; cinematography by Michael Dodds, Bruce
Dorfman and Jamie Maxtone-Graham; edited by Roger Schulte; released by
Friendship Bridge Productions. Film Forum 1, 209 West Houston Street, South
Village. Running time: 78 minutes. This film has no rating.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tiana, standing, in a scene, from her documentary "From
Hollywood to Hanoi." (Friendship Bridge Productions)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE SUPREME COURT;
Excerpts From Senate Hearing on the Ginsburg Nomination

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2911 words


Following are excerpts from yesterday's hearing by the Senate Judiciary
Committee on the nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg to become Associate Justice
of the United States Supreme Court, as transcribed by the Federal News Service,
a private transcription service:

ON ABORTION

Senator Hank Brown, Republican of Colorado, asked Judge Ginsburg about her
article suggesting that the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment might
better protect women's right to abortion than the privacy rights invoked in the
1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade.

JUDGE GINSBURG -- I'll be glad to try, Senator. May I say first that it's never,
in my mind, been an either-or, a rather one than the other; it's been both. And
I'll try to explain how my own thinking developed on this issue, and it came out
of a case involving a woman's choice for birth rather than the termination of
her pregnancy. It's one of the briefs that you have; it's the case of Capt.
Susan Struck v. Secretary of Defense, and this was Capt. Susan Struck's story:

She became pregnant while she was serving in the Air Force in Vietnam. This was
in the early 70's. She was offered a choice. She was told she could have an
abortion at the base hospital -- and let us remember that in the early 70's,
before Roe v. Wade, abortion was available on service bases in this country to
members of the service or, more often, dependents of members of the service.
Capt. Susan Struck said: "I do not want an abortion; I want to bear this child.
It's part of my religious faith that I do so. However, I will use only my
accumulated leave time for the childbirth, I will surrender the child for
adoption at birth, and I want to remain in the Air Force. That is my career."

She was told that that was not an option open to her if she wished to remain in
the Air Force. In that case, we argued three things: One, that this regulation
-- if you're pregnant you're out unless you have an abortion -- violated the
equal protection principle because no man was ordered out of service because he
had been a partner in a conception; no man was ordered out of service because he
was about to become a father.

And then we said that the Government is impeding, without cause, a woman's
choice whether to bear or not to bear a child, and that was her personal choice
and the interference with it was a violation of her liberty, her freedom to
choose, guaranteed by the due process clause. And then finally we said that this
was an unnecessary interference with her religious belief.

So all three strands were involved in Captain Struck's case. The main emphasis
was on her equality as a woman, vis a vis a man who was equally responsible for
the conception and then her personal choice, which the Government said she could
not have unless she gave up her career in the service.

In that case, all three strands were involved: her equality right, her right to
decide for herself whether she was going to bear the child, and her religious
belief. So it was never an either-or or rather. It was always recognizing that
the one thing that distinguishes women from men is that only women become
pregnant. And if you were going to subject a woman to disadvantageous treatment
on the basis of her pregnant status, which was what was happening here, you were
going to deny her equal treatment under the law.

And that argument, that discrimination -- disadvantageous treatment because of
pregnancy is sex discrimination -- was something that the Supreme Court might
have heard in the Struck case. But the Air Force decided that they were going to
waive her discharge. And although they had won in the trial court and won in the
court of appeals, the Supreme Court granted certiorari in that case, and at that
point, perhaps with the advice of the solicitor general, I don't know, the Air
Force decided that it would rather switch and fight, and Captain Struck's
discharge was waived. So she remained in the service, and the court never got
that case.

And the case that they eventually got, they decided that discrimination on the
basis of pregnancy was not discrimination on the basis of sex, and then this
body, the Congress, in the Pregnancy Discrimination Act, indicated that it
thought otherwise.

But the Struck brief, which involved a woman's choice for birth, is the place
where I first thought long and hard about this question, and never, ever thought
of it as an either-or, one-pocket-or-the-other. But I did think about it first
and foremost as differential treatment of the woman, based on her sex.

SENATOR BROWN -- I can see how the equal protection argument would apply to a
policy that interfered with her plan to bear the child. Could that argument be
applied for someone who wished to have the option of an abortion as well? Does
it apply both to the decision to not have an abortion as well as to a decision
to have an abortion, to terminate the pregnancy?

A. The argument was it's her right to decide either way, her right to decide
whether or not to bear a child.


                                    .  .  .

But you asked me about my thinking about equal protection versus individual
autonomy, and my answer to you is it's both. This is something central to a
woman's life, to her dignity. It's a decision that she must make for herself.
And when Government controls that decision for her, she's being treated as less
than a fully adult human responsible for her own choices.

Q. With regard to the equal protection argument, though, since this may well
confer a right to choose on the woman, or could, would it also follow that the
father would be entitled to a right to choose in this regard, or some rights in
this regard?

A. That was an issue left open in Roe v. Wade, but if I recall correctly, it was
closed in Casey, in the court's most recent decision. There were a series of
regulations that the court dealt with, and as I remember, it upheld most of
them, but it struck down one of them, which was the notice to the husband.  And
it has something to do with a matter that the chairman raised earlier. I think
there was an indication in that opinion that marriage and family life is not
always all that we might wish it to be, and that there are women whose physical
safety, even their lives would be endangered, if the law required them to notify
their partner.

So I believe that this case decision, which in other respects has been greeted
in some quarters with great distress, in this respect answered a question that
was left open in Roe, and said, and I believe it did strike down the
notification to the husband.

Q. I was concerned that if the equal protection argument were relied on to
insure a right to choose, that looking for a sex-blind standard in this regard,
that this same logic might also then convey rights on the father to this
decision. Do you see that as following logically from the rights that might be
conferred on the mother?

A. I will rest my answer on the Casey decision, which says in the end it's her
body, her life, and men, to that extent, are not similarly situated. They don't
bear the child.

Q. So the rights are not equal in this regard because the interests are not
equal?

A. I said on the equality side of it, that it is essential to a woman's equality
with man that her choice -- that she be the decision maker, that her choice be
controlling, and that if you impose restraints and disadvantage her, you are
disadvantaging her because of her sex. Put that together with the general line
of cases that have developed since, oh, a long string cases about procreation,
the centrality of that to an individual, starting from at least Skinner against
Oklahoma, when the state law required sterilization for certain recidivists --
that was a question of sterilizing a man -- but the importance of procreation to
an individual's autonomy. That applies to men as well as women.

The state controlling the woman is both denying her full autonomy and full
equality with men, and that was the idea that I tried to express in this
lecture. Never as an either-or question, but just that there were these two
strands, and that -- I think that both of them are recognized in the cases since
Roe.

ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS
 Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, asked Judge Ginsburg how she had
come to coin the legal term "gender discrimination."

JUDGE GINSBURG -- In the 70's, when I was at Columbia and writing briefs about
distinctions based on sex, and writing articles and speeches, I had a secretary,
and she said, "I've been typing this word sex, sex, sex, and let me tell you,
the audience that you are addressing -- the men that you are addressing" -- and
they were all men in the appellate courts in those days -- "the first
association of that word is not what you're talking about. So I suggest that you
use a grammar book term; use the word "gender." It will ward off distracting
associations."

SENATOR DeCONCINI -- That secretary obviously was a woman?

A. Yes. And, Millicent, if you're somewhere watching this, I owe it all to you.

Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, asked her about an article
discussing the 14th Amendment and the proposed equal rights amendment.

JUDGE GINSBURG -- It's a sad part of our history, Senator Specter, but it is
part of our history that at the time of the 14th Amendment, that great amendment
that changed so much in this nation, it didn't change the status of women. And
it is part of the history that the leading feminists of the day -- Susan B.
Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott -- campaigned against the
ratification of the 14th Amendment because it allowed a system to persist in the
United States where women couldn't vote; they couldn't hold office.

If they married, they couldn't hold property in their own name, they couldn't
contract for themselves. That's what life was like for women in the middle of
the 19th century. Times change, and eventually after nearly a century of
struggle, women achieved the vote, and they became full citizens, and many
people thought that when women became full citizens entitled to the vote, they
had achieved equality that made them full and equal citizens with men, entitled
to the same equal protection before the laws.

The position was that yes, it took bold and dynamic interpretation from what the
framers of the 14th Amendment intended. The framers of the 14th Amendment meant
no change; they intended no change at all in the status of women before the law,
but in 1920, when women achieved the vote, they became full citizens. And you
have to read this document as a whole -- changed, as Thurgood Marshall said,
over the years by constitutional amendment and by judicial construction.  And so
it was certainly a bold change from the middle of the 19th century until the
1970's when women's equal citizenship was recognized before the law.

I remain an advocate of the equal rights amendment, I will tell you, for this
reason: because I have a daughter and a granddaughter, and I would like the
legislature of this country and of all the states to stand up and say, "We know
what that history was in the 19th century, and we want to make a clarion call
that women and men are equal before the law, just as every modern human rights
document in the world does since 1970." I'd like to see that statement made just
that way in the United States Constitution.

ON RESTRAINT AND ACTIVISM

Senator DeConcini asked Judge Ginsburg about her response to a committee
questionnaire in which she said the term judicial activism "seems to me much
misperceived, a generality too often pressed into service by critics of the
court. "Can you name any instances," he asked, "where you think the Court
exceeded the powers of its authority in the past?"

JUDGE GINSBURG -- I spoke of the cases in which the courts have been most
criticized and, frankly, I criticized in return the legislators and the
executives who wouldn't take action when they should have. I spoke primarily of
the school cases, the institutional cases, hospitals and prison cases.

These are cases I observed that courts do not like. Judges feel extremely
uncomfortable having to deal with them, but I gave the example, I think, of
Judge Johnson in Alabama, who was severely criticized for attempting to run the
prisons in Alabama. He told -- he gave this account of it. He said, "The State's
Attorney stood up in my court and said that every prison in this state is in
violation of the Eight Amendment." And so, he said, at that point what the law
required him to do was clear. His own competence to do it, he was most doubtful
about that, but that he was called upon to supply a remedy. I think he explained
how he tried in every way to have that remedy come from the state officials, but
in the end, when it didn't, the court had to supply it.

Senator Charles Grassley, Republican of Iowa, asked her whether "judges
sometimes get carried away."

JUDGE GINSBURG -- The courts hear only such controversies as the Constitution
and the laws provide that courts shall hear.  Courts may not hear cases for
which the Constitution does not provide, for which legislation does not provide;
but when the laws do provide for controversies of a judiciary nature, the judges
must decide them. They have no choice. . . .

Although Justice Harlan is one of my heroes as a great Justice because he always
told us his reasoning -- he never hid it; it was always spelled out with great
clarity -- he might have been accused of legislating because he is responsible
for all of the cases I mentioned where the court chose extension rather than
invalidation. It was his concurring opinion in a case called Welch v. the United
States that prompted me to be bold enough to say, We are asking you to extend,
not invalidate, this law.

I don't know that anyone has ever called Harlan an activist for that, but the
case -- I will try to state it as quickly as I can -- it was a case of a
conscientious objector who was denied C.O. status, and he was -- his
conscientious objection to military service was based on a deeply held
philosophical belief, but it wasn't -- it wasn't tied to a religion.  And the
Congress, some thought, had pretty clearly limited C.O. status to people whose
religion dictated the position they were taking.

Some of the justices read the language of Congress, which seemed to say an
atheistic observer isn't covered, to in fact cover -- broadly enough to cover
Mr. Welch. Harlan said, "I can't do that. Congress was clear in saying this
objection is available to one who has a deeply held religious belief. That means
Congress has left out this man. That means I have to grapple with the
constitutional question: is this a violation of the First Amendment? And I think
it is, to limit the exemption to one whose belief is tied to a belief in a
supreme being."

Therefore, Harlan says, "I reached the next step. Having read the law as
Congress wrote it, having decided that that law is unconstitutional, do I now
say there is no more C.O. exemption until the legislature meets? No," he said,
"I must legislate a bit, and I must include Mr. Welch in this category of people
who qualify for conscientious objector status, because Congress wanted there to
be such an exemption." And, in Justice Harlan's judgment, Congress would have
chosen to include Mr. Welch in the catalogue of exempt people rather than to do
away with the category C.O. -- conscientious objectors -- altogether. So ----

SENATOR GRASSLEY -- But you can agree, though, that sometimes the courts get
carried away with rewriting the law, and isn't it still better to let Congress
act? You've noted that in your Rutgers article, I believe. Am I ----

A. Senator Grassley, Congress makes the policy, it writes the laws. Judges
believe, as everyone else does, that that's what legislators do in a democracy.


                                    .  .  .

SENATOR SPECTER -- Is it the role of the courts to upset decisions of
legislators based on the jurists' own ideas about enlightened policy by bold,
dynamic interpretation of the Constitution?

A. I prize the institution of judicial review for constitutionality. I think we
have become a model for the world in that respect. And that's one of the reasons
why I resist labels like "activism," "restraint." I think it is a very precious
institution that we have, and it should not be abused.

After World War II, nations in other parts of the world that never had judicial
review for constitutionality as part of their tradition adopted models
compatible with their own systems but inspired by what our Supreme Court has
been in our society, and that role needs to be guarded and to be exercised with
-- with great -- with great care.

ON THE DEATH PENALTY

JUDGE GINSBURG -- My own view on the death penalty, I think, is not relevant to
any question that I would be asked to decide as a judge. I will be scrupulous in
applying the law on the basis of legislation and precedent. I will be -- as I
said in my opening remarks, my own views and what I would do if I were sitting
in the legislature are not relevant to the job for which you are considering me,
which is the job of a judge.

And so I would not like to answer that question any more than I would like to
answer the question of what choice I would make for myself, what reproductive
choice I would make for myself. It's not relevant to what I would decide as a
judge.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, with her husband, Martin Ginsburg,
at the beginning of the afternoon session of yesterday's hearing. Senator Howell
Heflin of Alabama questioning Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the second day of her
confirmation hearings. (Photographs by Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Roscoe Robinson Jr. Dies at 64; First Black to Be 4-Star General

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 22


Gen. Roscoe Robinson Jr., a distinguished combat commander and the first black
man to become a four-star Army general, died today of leukemia. He was 64.

General Robinson died at Walter Reed Army Medical Hospital in Washington, the
Army said in a statement.

General Robinson, who served in Korea and Vietnam, received his fourth star in
1982, when he was assigned to be the United States representative to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization's military committee. He retired in October 1985.

Shortly after graduation from the United States Military Academy in 1951, he saw
action in the Korean War. He served again in combat as a Battalion Commander in
Vietnam. His awards and decorations included the Distinguished Service Medal,
Silver Star with Oak Leaf Cluster, Legion of Merit with two Oak Leaf Clusters,
Distinguished Flying Cross and Bronze Star Medal.

His Army posts included those of deputy chief of staff for logistics in Vietnam,
commanding general of the 82d Airborne Division in Fort Bragg, N.C., and
Commanding General of the IX Corps in Japan.

In 1987, after his retirement, he was named to oversee the work of a panel that
re-examined the Korean War performance of some black Army units that were much
criticized at the time. He also served on the board of the parent company of
Northwest Airlines.

General Robinson, a St. Louis native, earned a master's degree in international
relations at the University of Pittsburgh.

He is survived by his wife, the former Mildred E. Sims of Falls Church, Va.; his
daughter, Carol Robinson Royal of Burke, Va.; his son, Capt. Bruce E. Robinson,
who is stationed at the Pentagon, and two grandchildren.

A funeral service will be held at 2 P.M. Monday at the Memorial Chapel in Fort
Myer, Va., and General Robinson will be buried in Arlington National Cemetery.

NAME: Roscoe Robinson Jr.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Roscoe Robinson Jr. (U.S. Army, 1978)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 23, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At Home Abroad;
No Longer Quiet

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


"It used to be a quiet country," Dr. Vichit Suraphongchai said. "We opened the
door, and in came the wind of change. Do we want to close it again?"

Dr. Vichit is president of Bangkok Bank, the country's largest, and his question
was only rhetorical. No one visible here wants to end Thailand's boom. After
economic growth in double digits over recent years, people are complaining that
it is now a mere 8 percent or so -- a figure that would be a miracle in Western
countries.

The explosive growth has consequences: social, political, environmental. They
make Thailand a kind of laboratory of change.

What strikes the visitor returning to Bangkok is the physical transformation. In
the last half-dozen years the city has been dotted with skyscrapers, and more
are going up everywhere. The price in tranquillity is high -- traffic beyond
belief, overcrowding, inadequate sewers.

The social transformation is more important. A country of peasants is becoming
one of industrial workers and entrepreneurs. It is a free-market society, where
there has been almost no limit to what a risk-taker can try.

But to me the political consequences are the most fascinating. For the growth of
a middle class and the involvement of Thailand in the world economy are playing
a significant part in what seems to be a movement toward lasting democracy.

Thailand for decades has had a cycle of elected Governments and military
takeovers. The latest coup was in 1991, when Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon took over.

Then, in May 1992, Thai troops fired on pro-democracy demonstrators, killing at
least 52 and perhaps as many as 200. The events of May, as they are called,
shook the country -- and the military. An election last September produced a
Government coalition led by pro-democracy forces under Prime Minister Chuan
Leekpai.

Historically, the military has been seen by many Thais as an efficient
alternative to corrupt politicians. The 1991 coup was at first popular.

But people say that that attitude is changing, and the chance of successful
coups in future diminishing. In a more modern society there is more citizen
interest in government. Another reason is that Thais, perhaps especially the
crucial business people, are highly conscious of foreign opinion and think coups
make Thailand look bad abroad.

"Military intervention in future cannot be ruled out," a diplomat said. "It's
not a done deal. The process of getting the military out of politics is not
finished, but it is progressing."

The regard for foreign opinion includes resentment of what Thais think is an
outdated foreign image of the country as a sleepy hollow full of drugs and
prostitutes. The Government in fact is trying hard to suppress drug traffic and
child prostitution. It also has a serious AIDS prevention program, but the
problem is already profound: 400,000 to 500,000 people H.I.V. positive in a
population of 57 million.

Thailand may be the freest country in Asia. The print press is bold and
critical. The other day The Bangkok Post criticized the Government and others in
the region for "their hypocritical policy of 'constructive engagement' " with
the brutal military regime next door in Burma.

The Thai military has a hand in lucrative trade for Burmese timber, seeing to it
that contracts go to companies in which their families and friends have an
interest. "Burmese trees are very old and very large," one person said, "so
that's a lot of money for our generals."

The military also used to sell weapons to the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, and it
had a part in business deals with the Khmer Rouge for timber and gems. But the
Thai Government has largely suppressed that trade since the U.N. Security
Council banned it 18 months ago.

Continuation of the democratic trend may depend on Thailand's ability to adapt
to economic change, especially to competition for low-wage manufacturing from
Vietnam and China. It will have to move to more sophisticated work. For that it
will need to spend much more on education. Today 83 percent of employed Thais
have had only primary education.

Will democracy last? I asked Dr. Vichit. "Tell me what lasts," he replied.
"Buddhism says the ultimate truth is change. The rate of change is increasing.
The dynamism is what makes life interesting."

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Increases Fund To Outbid Terrorists For Afghan Missiles

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


The Central Intelligence Agency's covert operations division will spend $55
million in a new effort to buy back more than 300 Stinger antiaircraft missiles
it gave to guerrillas fighting the Soviet-backed Government of Afghanistan in
the 1980's, Government and intelligence officials say.

The effort reflects the agency's fear that it may be outbid by terrorists and
hostile governments in the black market for the Stinger, a lightweight,
shoulder-carried, highly accurate antiaircraft missile considered the best
weapon of its kind, the officials said.

They said Iranian and North Korean espionage agents and Islamic militant groups
were bidding to buy Stingers from demobilized Afghan rebels starved for cash in
a country shattered by years of war and privation.

Some Obtained by Iran

"The Iranians have already captured or otherwise obtained some Stingers and
continue to try to accumulate them," said Edward S. Juchniewicz, who was the
C.I.A.'s associate director for covert operations from 1982 to 1986. "I
understand why people are exercised. I wouldn't want one to hit the airplane I'm
on."

The Stinger, which finds its targets with a homing sensor that locks on to the
heat of an aircraft's engines, is capable of destroying aircraft at a range of
seven miles or more.

The new effort to reclaim the missiles, which was first reported in The Los
Angeles Times today, followed a $10 million effort that proved insufficient, the
officials said. The spending increase reflected the intensity of bidding for the
weapons, they said.

The fate of the Stingers is a particularly messy aftermath of one of the cold
war's great struggles. The C.I.A. and the Pentagon secretly shipped nearly 1,000
Stingers to the Afghan rebels from 1986 to 1989. At least 300 are now
unaccounted for, officials say. The missiles were a small but highly significant
part of a $3 billion covert action program, the intelligence agency's biggest
paramilitary operation since Vietnam.

The Stingers helped turn the tide in the rebels' nine-year war against the
Soviet Union, which sent troops into Afghanistan in 1979. Their deployment in
Afghanistan represented the only known front of the cold war in which American
missiles shot down Soviet pilots.

Use Against U.S. Is Feared

Now the C.I.A. fears that the missiles, gone astray, could be used against
Americans.

"The Stinger problem is very complicated," said Zalmay Khalilzad, a former
Pentagon and State Department official involved in the program to support the
Afghan rebels. "The problem is you get in competition with Iran, and they can
outbid you. A lot of different Afghans have the missiles, and they are in bad
economic shape. The price can go up when Iran and others compete for buying
them."

Mr. Juchniewicz said Iran might try to exchange the highly valued Stingers for
military equipment it covets, including long-range ground-to-ground missiles
being developed by North Korea.

Despite the threat posed by the Stingers, Mr. Juchniewicz said he had few
regrets about supporting the Afghan guerrillas, known as mujahedeen, or holy
warriors.

"One makes the assumption when one goes to battle that one's equipment will be
captured by the enemy," he said. "So unfortunately we lost some Stingers, and
now our enemy has one of our best weapons. But the Stingers turned the war in
the mujahedeen's favor."

Blow to the Soviet Union

Reflecting a widely held view among American intelligence officials that the
Soviet loss in Afghanistan was a fatal blow to the Soviet Union, he added: "The
Stingers broke the Soviets' back. Isn't the danger posed by a handful of
Stingers worth the dissolution of the Soviet empire?"

The bidding for the missiles will take place in a strange international bazaar.
In Afghanistan today there is little law and order, and weapons and heroin are
the primary commodities. Travelers from more than 40 Islamic countries go there
to learn from the rebels who stared down the Soviets.

Among them were two World Trade Center bombing suspects, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef and
Ahmad M. Ajaj, and two men indicted on charges of conspiring to murder
politicians and blow up Federal buildings in New York, Clement Hampton-El and
Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, Federal investigators say.

Some of the Afghan rebels have turned against their former patrons. "Some of the
same people who are actual or potential terrorists in this country are former
guerrilla fighters in Afghanistan," said David Whipple, the C.I.A.'s former
national intelligence officer for counterterrorism.

To reclaim the missiles, the agency must depend on Pakistan's intelligence
service, which distributed the C.I.A.'s weaponry during the war.

The Pakistanis favored the most radical and anti-American of the Afghan rebel
leaders, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. By dint of his superior arsenal, Mr. Hekmatyar
became Prime Minister of Afghanistan earlier this year. He and commanders loyal
to him are believed to control a significant number of the Stingers. Mr.
Hekmatyar also has made alliances of convenience with Iran.

"Hekmatyar was occasionally close to the Iranians, and we were not blind to
that," said Fred C. Ikle, who fiercely supported the Afghan program as Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy in the Reagan Administration.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fear of terrorism is causing the Central Intelligence Agency to
buy back 300 Stinger missiles that they sold to Afghan guerrillas.
(Gamma-Liaison/Evans-Spooner, 1987)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 123 words



7 Homeless Boys Slain in Rio

Hooded members of a so-called extermination group in Rio de Janeiro killed seven
homeless boys and wounded two as gunmen opened fire on dozens of youths. Page 3.


Industry May Aid Ex-Soviets

The White House wants American companies more involved in building a private
sector in the former Soviet Union, and more money allocated for the non-Russian
republics. Page 4.

White House Irks Moynihan

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan declared that the Clinton Administration must
make compromises on the budget. Page 26.

Vietnam War Grows Longer

In New York State, America's longest war just got longer. The starting date was
moved up, making more veterans eligible for benefits. Page 21.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Official Dismissed in Dispute At Disabled Veterans Group

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


A top executive of the Disabled American Veterans has been dismissed for
"dishonesty and misconduct" after using $80,000 from the group to settle a claim
against him made by the wife of an employee, D.A.V. officials said today.

Charles (Butch) E. Joeckel Jr., the group's national adjutant and a leader of
the veterans lobby here, was dismissed earlier this month after the payment was
discovered during an audit, the officials said. The dismissal was first reported
today in The Washington Post.

Mr. Joeckel said today through his lawyer, John W. Karr, that he had done
nothing improper and that the D.A.V. was obligated to make the payment.

Mr. Karr said his client was the victim of a "political firefight." He said the
lawyer for the D.A.V., Joseph C. Zengerle, who is also the top elected official
of the group, knew the circumstances of the payment.

Representatives of both sides today described a tangled series of events. But
none would say what the woman had asserted in the original complaint. One
complication is that Mr. Zengerle originally represented Mr. Joeckel in the
complaint brought by the employee's wife.

'Internecine Warfare'

"We're in the middle of protesting his firing and of trying to straighten out
the fact that what this really is is a severe case of internecine warfare in the
D.A.V.," Mr. Karr said.

Mr. Joeckel (pronounced JOE-kul), 45, who lost both legs in a land mine
explosion in Vietnam, was appointed head of the organization in May 1988. His
ouster comes just weeks before the veterans group's national convention in San
Francisco on Aug. 14.

The D.A.V. is one of the three congressionally chartered veterans organizations,
along with the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars. It makes annual
financial reports to Congress and receives free space and telephones in Federal
offices and veterans hospitals.

Mr. Zengerle was elected national commander of the group last year. He ordered
the audit in February after several veterans challenged Mr. Joeckel's leadership
and financial management.

Mr. Karr said that Mr. Joeckel had wanted to fight the woman's claim, but that
Mr. Zengerle had pressed for settlement to avoid publicity that could hurt the
organization. The woman, her husband and Mr. Joeckel signed an agreement to keep
the matter confidential.

Mr. Zengerle said he represented Mr. Joeckel as an individual, not a D.A.V.
official, from July 7 to Sept. 22, 1991. He said he removed himself from the
case because of a possible conflict of interest in an unrelated case. Mr.
Zengerle, a partner at Bingham, Dana & Gould, eventually withdrew from both
cases.

Mr. Zengerle said he did not authorize any payments by the veterans group for a
settlement, although the D.A.V. paid $21,000 to Mr. Zengerle's firm in
connection with the woman's claim. The firm later returned the money.

Mr. Joeckel's case was then transferred to another lawyer, Robert Muse of Stein,
Mitchell & Mezines, who negotiated an $80,000 settlement.

Payment Deemed Improper

According to the veterans group, Mr. Joeckel told the organization's national
finance committee earlier this year that he had the group's insurance carrier
pay the $80,000 because he was entitled to coverage as a D.A.V. officer. But the
finance committee concluded that the civil claim against Mr. Joeckel was against
him as an individual, and that the payment was improper.

Mr. Joeckel resigned as adjutant on June 14 but remained as an employee. He was
dismissed on July 2.

The committee also dismissed Stephen L. Edmiston, executive director of the
group's national office in Cold Spring, Ky., for allowing the payment.

Mr. Edmiston's lawyer, Keith A. Rosenberg, said Mr. Edmiston had documentation
from Cleveland Jordan, the D.A.V. commander in 1991, that claims like Mr.
Joeckel's should be covered by the group's insurance.

Mr. Edmiston also had a letter from the Stein, Mitchell firm, which represented
Mr. Joeckel at the time, stating that the settlement was in regard to a matter
that involved both Mr. Joeckel individually and the veterans group.

"Based on that, he had no reason to believe the claim should not be made," Mr.
Rosenberg said. "My client did absolutely nothing wrong. He will contest his
firing and will bring legal action against the D.A.V. if appropriate."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Earlier Date Set for Service In Vietnam

BYLINE: By JAMES DAO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 23


In New York State, America's longest war just got longer.

On Thursday, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation that establishes Dec. 22,
1961, as the beginning of American involvement in the Vietnam War, making an
array of state veterans' benefits available to as many as 25,000 additional
state residents. The day is one year earlier than the date previously recognized
by the state and more than two years earlier than the one established by
Congress in 1975.

But in revising history even so slightly, Mr. Cuomo and the Legislature thrust
themselves into a thorny debate that reflects the complex attitudes Americans
hold regarding the undeclared war. Just when did America become a combatant?

Was it when the nation sent its first combat troops to the region? Or when it
increased the number of its military advisers? Or when the first American
serviceman was killed in action -- which, depending on the historical source,
was in 1945, 1959 or 1961?

Victory for American Legion

The state's decision did little to clarify the issue because the date is one
Vietnam experts do not consider historically significant. But it marked a
political victory for the American Legion and added momentum to its efforts to
persuade Congress to set an earlier date for the beginning of America's war in
Vietnam.

The American Legion marks Dec. 22, 1961, as the beginning of the war, largely
because President John F. Kennedy issued medals for "hostile action" service to
soldiers in Vietnam on or after that day.

But the Federal Veterans Administration uses Aug. 5, 1964, for determining
whether veterans are eligible for special wartime benefits, which include
pensions for the poor and disabled. That is the day Congress passed the Gulf of
Tonkin Resolution giving the President almost unbridled authority to use
military force in Vietnam.

The American Legion and its supporters argue that hundreds of thousands of
Vietnam veterans nationwide have been denied benefits and recognition because
they served just before Aug. 5, 1964, even though they were often in as much
danger as those who served years later.

"As my colleagues know, Aug. 5, 1964, is a rather arbitrary choice for the start
of the Vietnam War," said Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York,
when he introduced legislation earlier this year to set Dec. 22, 1961, as the
start of the war. "Clearly, U.S. servicemen were involved years earlier."

But just how much earlier is a question few historians agree on. Unlike previous
wars and conflicts since, there was no declaration of war, no sudden
mobilization of troops, no surprise attacks that suddenly told Americans that
they were at war.

"It didn't begin from one day to the next," said Stanley Karnow, the journalist
who wrote a history of the war. "It's not like Dec. 7, 1941. We oozed into
Vietnam."

It was clear, however, that Americans were dying in Vietnam long before Aug. 5,
1964. Between 1961 and 1964, 110 Americans were killed in action, according to
the Department of Defense. By the end of 1963, there were 16,300 American
military personnel stationed in Vietnam, up from 3,200 at the end of 1961.

"The individuals over there in the early 1960's faced hostilities," said Harvey
J. McCagg, spokesman for the State Division of Veterans Affairs. "How those
hostilities compared to later years is up for question. But if you get killed,
it doesn't much matter if it was '61 or '68, you died for your country."

Like many states, New York extends special benefits to soldiers who served in
times of war, regardless of whether they saw combat. In New York State, those
include preferential treatment on Civil Service exams, added Civil Service job
protections, reduced property taxes in most municipalities and college tuition
aid.

Just how much this will cost has not been determined. But the sponsors of the
legislation, Senator Dean G. Skelos, Republican of Rockville Centre, and
Assemblyman Ronald C. Tocci, Democrat of New Rochelle, have said they expect the
costs to be small.

Federal officials say they believe most states use Aug. 5, 1964, as a cutoff
date for state veterans' benefits. But several use earlier dates. Last year, New
Jersey set Dec. 31, 1960, as the beginning of the war, because the Pentagon
significantly increased the number of military advisers in Vietnam after that
date.

Hodgepodge of Dates

Around the country, there is a hodgepodge of official dates for the war's
beginning.

Vietnam Veterans of America uses Jan. 1, 1959, for accepting members because
both American and Communist guerrilla military activity increased at that time,
said Bill Crandell, the group's legislative advocate.

The first names on the Vietnam Memorial in Washington belong to soldiers killed
in July 1959.

But it is widely believed that the first American soldier killed in Vietnam's
civil war was Lieut. Col. A. Peter Dewey, the nephew of Thomas E. Dewey, then
Governor of New York. Lieutenant Dewey was shot by guerrillas, though he may not
have been the intended target, in 1945.

The American Legion and some historians say the first American soldier killed
while on combat duty was ambushed on Dec. 22, 1961.

Some dates remain inexplicable. State officials, for instance, do not know the
origins of New York State's original date for the beginning of the war: Jan. 1,
1963.

Roles Played Down

Amid the historical confusion, soldiers who served in Vietnam before Aug. 5,
1964, say they feel their roles in the war have been played down, a situation
they think New York State's new law will help change.

"This enfranchises a group of people that haven't gotten the recognition they
deserve," said George E. Clark Jr., a lobbyist for the American Legion who, as a
Marine Corps lance corporal, trained South Vietnamese troops in late 1961 and
early 1962.

Today, Mr. Clark, 53, a resident of New Lebanon, works for the state training
firefighters in handling hazardous materials and travels the state widely as an
advocate for Vietnam War veterans.

But while he was in Vietnam, Mr. Clark's superiors instructed him not to tell
anyone, including his family, where he was or what he was doing.

"I actually believe that my own family have trouble accepting the fact that I
was over there," he said.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "This enfranchises a group of people that haven't gotten the
recognition they deserve," said George E. Clark Jr., a Marine Corps officer who
trained South Vietnamese troops in late 1961 and early 1962. (Joyce Dopkeen/The
New York Times) (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SOUTH ASIANS SEEK A SECURITY FORUM

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, July 22


Anxious over the growing power of China and over the pullout of American armed
forces from Asia, several large Southeast Asian countries are moving to create a
regional security forum with the United States and Japan that will meet
regularly to discuss military stability in the region with the world's
fastest-growing economy.

The security forum, which is being established at the suggestion of Japan and
with the blessing of the Clinton Administration, represents an important shift
in strategy for the major non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia, which had
long depended on Washington to keep peace in the region.

The creation of the forum, which does not yet have a name, is expected to be
formally announced here on Saturday at the end of a two-day meeting of foreign
ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean.

Southeast Asian diplomats said the United States, China, Japan, Russia, Vietnam,
Australia and several other countries with interests in Asia will be included in
the forum, which for now will take the form of annual or semi-annual high-level
conferences on security issues.

Possibility of More

The diplomats did not rule out the possibility that the forum would someday
develop into something more -- perhaps even a defense alliance.

"The nations of Southeast Asia have had the luxury for such a long time of not
worrying about defense issues," a senior Asian diplomat said. "We all much
prefer to focus on economic growth. But we must be logical about this. The
region is changing, the United States is reducing its presence and we must be
willing to discuss ways of protecting ourselves."

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations -- comprising Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand -- focuses on economic
development and trade. Until this year, security matters were left off the
agenda of Asean meetings, an understandable decision given the reliable American
security umbrella.

Asian officials said the new talk of military cooperation was being driven by
the departure of American troops from Southeast Asia as part of the reduction of
forces worldwide, and by a distrust of China's growing economic power and recent
military purchases.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Roscoe Robinson Jr. Dies at 64; First Black to Be 4-Star General

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 278 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 22


Gen. Roscoe Robinson Jr., a distinguished combat commander and the first black
man to become a four-star Army general, died of leukemia today. He was 64.

General Robinson died at Walter Reed Army Medical Hospital in Washington, the
Army said in a statement.

General Robinson, who served in Korea and Vietnam, received his fourth star in
1982, when he was assigned to be the United States representative to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization's military committee. He retired in October 1985.

Shortly after graduation from the United States Military Academy in 1951, he saw
action in the Korean War. He served again in combat as a battalion commander in
Vietnam. His awards and decorations included the Distinguished Service Medal,
Silver Star with Oak Leaf Cluster, Legion of Merit with two Oak Leaf Clusters,
Distinguished Flying Cross and Bronze Star Medal.

His Army posts included those of deputy chief of staff for logistics in Vietnam,
commanding general of the 82d Airborne Division in Fort Bragg, N.C., and
commanding general of the IX Corps in Japan.

After his retirement, he served on the board of the parent company of Northwest
Airlines.

General Robinson, a St. Louis native, earned a master's degree in international
relations at the University of Pittsburgh.

He is survived by his wife, the former Mildred E. Sims of Falls Church, Va.; his
daughter, Carol Robinson Royal of Burke, Va.; his son, Capt. Bruce E. Robinson,
who is stationed at the Pentagon, and two grandchildren.

A funeral service will be held at 2 P.M. on Monday at the Memorial Chapel in
Fort Myer, Va. General Robinson will be buried in Arlington National Cemetery.

NAME: Roscoe Robinson Jr.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Roscoe Robinson Jr. (Reuters)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


Since there is no more Evil Empire, many authors of espionage fiction are now
writing about terrorism. Consider THE BRITANNIA CONTRACT, by Paul Mann (Carroll
& Graf, $21), in which terrorists take over the British royal yacht, with Queen
Elizabeth and Prince Philip on board. Or CLOUDBURST, a first novel by Ryne
Douglas Pearson (Morrow, $23), in which terrorists kill the President of the
United States. Or DESERT FIRE, by David Hagberg (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95), in
which terrorists threaten to blow up a nuclear power plant in Germany if their
demands are not met.

Books like these have certain built-in liabilities. There are no shades between
Good and Evil. And one knows in advance that the down-to-the-wire convulsions
are going to be settled with Good triumphant. Characters in such novels are as
black-and-white as the plotting: rather unbelievable heroes on one side, equally
unbelievable villains on the other.

With all that, there is also a great deal of built-in excitement, and a skillful
writer can carry a reader along even with the predictable nature of the plot. It
must be said, though, that not many skillful writers are attracted to the genre.

The authors may have done their homework; many are, or were, professional
military men who know what they are writing about when they discuss flying or
warfare or hand-to-hand combat. But deft characterization? Striking imagery?
Ingenious plotting? Forget about it.

These three books are typical. In "The Britannia Contract," the terrorists who
capture the royal yacht off Saudi Arabia are members of the I.R.A. Their leader,
a psychotic, is a former officer in Britain's Special Forces. One of his demands
is the immediate withdrawal of British troops from Northern Ireland.

Britain's response to the catastrophe is complicated. There are those who regard
it as an opportunity to unseat the Prime Minister. There are those who are
willing to cave in to the terrorists. And there are those who will sacrifice the
royal family rather than show weakness. The Queen herself is of the last
opinion.

Of course, things turn out well, thanks to the heroics of a small group of
people and thanks to American help. The Queen cuts a fine, dignified figure; the
author clearly admires her. As for Prince Philip, his temper is hinted at here
and there.

"Cloudburst" is pretty standard stuff. Here the terrorists are Libyans. After
the assassination of the President, the next act is the hijacking of an American
jumbo jet, which occupies a major part of the book. The hijacking is tied up
with a plan to detonate a very dirty nuclear device over New York or Washington.

The book is assembled in the usual hop-skip-jump style favored by modern authors
of action novels: hop to Benghazi, skip to Washington, jump to Los Angeles. At
the end, an expert has only a short time to defuse the bomb. Does he succeed?
Well, New York and Washington are still standing, aren't they?

"Desert Fire" takes a look at Saddam Hussein's quest for a nuclear bomb. An
honest German cop, investigating the sadistic murders of two women, finds a link
with a madman high in Iraqi circles. Eventually, they come face to face. The
writing is rather primitive and cliched:

" 'What do you want?' she asked.

"The killer smiled cruelly. 'You,' he whispered."

There are, thank goodness, no terrorists in DOUBLE FAULT, by Jack M. Bickham
(Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95). This is the latest in the series featuring Brad
Smith, a Vietnam veteran and former champion tennis player who manages to get
himself into terrible situations in which life and limb are imperiled.

There is less tennis here than in the previous books, though Brad does play in
an international tournament that he does not finish. An old friend from his
C.I.A. days asks him to look into a little matter involving Vietnam veterans who
have been murdered. Behind all this is a big secret that some powers in the
United States Government want to keep a secret.

In the process of getting to the truth of the matter, Brad loses his girlfriend.
She objects strenuously to his C.I.A. association, as she did in the earlier
books. This is beginning to be something of a bore. C'mon, Brad. Next time
around, don't worry so much about her. And maybe give us a little more tennis?

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Walter Cronkite Finds It Hard to Say No

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words

DATELINE: MARTHA'S VINEYARD, Mass.


Reassurance has always been Walter Cronkite's stock in trade, the ability to
convince viewers that when he is on the air all will turn out well. And, it is
in this sense reassuring to hear that the former CBS anchorman hates to see
himself on camera. That's what he says. He likes to be in front of the camera,
but he does not like looking at the on-screen results.

"I cringe when I see myself," Mr. Cronkite was saying the other day. He was
sitting in shorts and a sun-bleached plaid shirt in his vacation house
overlooking the bay here. "I don't feel I look that good. I get fat, sloppy. My
suits don't fit that well. When I do interviews, my questions don't have the
arrowlike quality of a Mike Wallace."

And so, Walter Cronkite remains modest, all too approachably human, which is
reassuring as well. But that does not stop him from putting his familiar
qualities to use from time to time. And lately he has been doing that often
enough to seem to be devising a kind of anchorman's rebirth for himself. Mr.
Cronkite never completely disappeared from the country's television screens
since he stopped doing the "CBS Evening News" 12 years ago. What he did do,
however, was a far cry from guiding the nation, live, through its periods of
crisis. Every year, instead, he has done things like guide PBS's annual
broadcasts of the New Year's concert of the Vienna Philharmonic. Once he even
conducted the Hochund Deutchmeister Band in a rendition of "Stars and Stripes
Forever."

Mr. Cronkite perhaps faces a dilemma common only to very famous people -- how to
stay in the game and remain active even after the glory days are over. At the
age of 76, he seems to have hit on a solution, which has been to become busier
than ever. And the reason he is in such demand, according to those who are after
his services, is that there is nobody else quite so reassuring as Walter
Cronkite is, and quite as much of a draw.

Together with Jonathan Ward, one of his producers at CBS, Mr. Cronkite has
created his own documentary film company and is producing television specials on
some subjects generally deemed too complex for regular network treatment.

Two months ago, the Discovery Channel broadcast "Help Unwanted," a look at the
changing face of unemployment in America. This Thursday night, it will show
"Where Do We Fight?," which looks at American military policy abroad or, as Mr.
Cronkite puts it, "at public opinion and public voices and how we decide where
the U.S. should involve its military in the world."

To be sure, these are not the kinds of programs that will set the chattering
classes on fire. Indeed, Mr. Cronkite is held in check by what he calls his
"golden handcuffs," an agreement with CBS stipulating that he cannot work for a
major network. He is therefore pretty much restricted to the smaller audiences
of cable and public television.

Last year Mr. Cronkite's voice was heard on a segment of "Murphy Brown." Though
he never appeared on the show, some newspapers reported that he was going to be
a regular on the program. Mr. Cronkite said that was never anybody's intention.

So, the Walter Cronkite of the old days is not about to reappear in all of his
former splendor. Still, the old anchorman has been in
demand. He anchored the Discovery Channel's special broadcast on the Holocaust
in April, which coincided with the opening of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in
Washington. He narrated a four-part series on dinosaurs. He was the on-camera
announcer for three documentaries shown on PBS, on aging, health insurance and
poor children, respectively.

Next month, rather than sail his sloop in the Virgin Islands, he is off to
Scandinavia for a documentary series called "The Vikings"; then he heads for
Kenya for a British documentary, "The Search for Man," about Richard Leakey and
other paleoanthropologists.  "We've worked with a lot of movie stars, like James
Earl Jones, Meryl Streep and others," said Roger Weisberg, the producer of Mr.
Cronkite's PBS documentaries. "Frankly, when we began working with Mr. Cronkite,
we not only had the benefit of his experience, but we had an unusual audience
draw. Stations in the PBS system were more interested; our ratings improved.
He's the best investment we could make in getting publicity for our programs."

Somewhere along the line, we became a country of celebrity rather than
authority, and celebrity is by its very nature evanescent. Authority is more
durable, and Mr. Cronkite is one of the few people around who has it.

Certainly in his newest productions, the old Walter Cronkite of CBS days remains
entirely recognizable. He is a bit grayer now, and his voice has lost just a
touch of its gravelly richness, but only a touch.

He does have just a bit of the quality of the aging tenor, still mellifluous but
not quite as mellifluous as before. Watching Mr. Cronkite, in all his
avuncularity, tell us the way it is on the Discovery Channel is practically
Proustian; like tea and Madeleines, it summons up a rich field of associations.

It is not, of course, easy to regain a top spot in one of the slots available
for national attention. Watching Mr. Cronkite these days, one also realizes how
much television has changed. His new productions do not, for example, have the
resonance of his famous old "You Are There" programs. The world belongs to
hipper types than Mr. Cronkite, to Larry King and David Letterman, and it is
unlikely that he will attract the ever younger flocks who watch television.
Instead, he will be the trustworthy, reassuring commentator on the old-fashioned
hard stuff, like the Great Books and adventures in science.

Mr. Cronkite's rise to ultimate trustworthiness was smooth and enjoyable and
tinged with elements of disappeared worlds. In Kansas City in the early days, he
used to do a five-minute program of baseball scores on a tiny 100-watt radio
station, clandestinely reading the scores from the Western Union wire at a
nearby tobacco shop, memorizing them and then running out to write them down.
Then he did reconstructed football games, graduating eventually to live football
games.

Many years later he became the anchorman for the network's affiliate in
Washington. Over a long career, there has been Walter Cronkite guiding a nation
through the Kennedy assassination, the Vietnam War, the moon landings, Watergate
and many other events.

Today, one might wonder why Mr. Cronkite works so hard. Friends say that he is
basically a veteran reporter who loves to work. He explains: "It's because I
can't say 'no.' I've got no facility for negatives. People call about speeches,
seminars, documentaries and everything sounds interesting. My wife stands in
front of me and mouths 'no,' but it seems so easy a year in advance."

That leads to another question: What, in a country that gobbles fads and
personalities of the month, accounts for his considerable staying power, his
capacity, even at his age, to outdraw Meryl Streep as the on-camera announcer
for serious documentaries?

The answer, in part, probably has to do with that word "serious." There are
still a couple of slots available for Mr. Cronkite's kind of gravitas. He can
still play that role.

NAME: Walter Cronkite

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Walter Cronkite at his summer home on Martha's Vineyard -- Less
time on his sloop, more time on the air. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
Pride, Politics and Puerto Rico From El Museo del Barrio

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 16; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: THE BRONX


MUSEUMS undergoing renovation commonly send parts of their collections on the
road. The tours can cover a lot of ground and last a year or more. In the case
of El Museo del Barrio, at 104th Street and Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, the
excerpt is small and the journey begins and ends at the Lehman College Art
Gallery here.

But that does not lessen the significance of the show, which is summed up in its
title, "Pa'lante." This exhortation to "move forward" was coined in the early
1970's and became a rallying cry for militant Puerto Rican groups like the Young
Lords. Though it may have seemed like a byproduct of "West Side Story" to the
rest of the world, the group was a serious political organization devoted to
bettering the lot of Hispanic-Americans, and, in the heady days of the Civil
Rights struggle, members expressed solidarity with black Americans.

Notwithstanding digressions into the affairs of Mexico, Chile, Argentina and
Uruguay (and statements on the Biafra famine, the Vietnam War and the Gulf War),
"Pa'lante" is primarily about Puerto Rico and the struggle of Puerto Ricans for
freedom and equality. The show comes with a catalogue written by its curator,
Susana Torruella Leval, who is also acting director of El Museo del Barrio. She
notes that the museum was founded -- in 1969 -- by Puerto Ricans concerned about
"the invisibility of their cultural history in the United States."

The story, if not the show, begins at a light box containing a blue-toned
photograph of a man supporting a basket with head and hand. Superimposed on this
are words taken from the diary of Columbus's first voyage to America. Although
the montage is the work of the Chilean artist Alfredo Jaar, the photograph looks
a lot like those taken by Sebastiao Salgado of men working the Brazilian gold
mine, Serra Pelada.

In any case, the quote itself is manipulative, because it describes the heedless
generosity with which the Caribbean Indians turned over their gold to the
invaders -- as if the plain facts of the Conquest were not painful enough to
contemplate.

But then, sentimental irony abounds in this selection. Another example is Robert
Coane's somewhat ethnocentric comment on the Gulf War. Presiding over this
image, executed in a mixture of paint and sand, is a vulture clutching a red,
white and green flag and flanked by the dark silhouettes of El Moro, the fort in
San Juan, and a church. Below that and set within floral borders are the
faceless busts of three Puerto Rican soldiers killed in the Gulf War, each
decorated with a medal. They, in turn, surmount a stretch of sand on which lies
the dark shape of a body bag.

In "La Isla del Encanto" ("The Island of Enchantment"), acrylic on paper, Marina
Gutierrez covers in faux-naive fashion the exploitation of Puerto Rico. This
indictment ranges from a diagram of a slave ship to a row of headless figures
dressed in uniforms and business suits and includes farmers, fishermen and palm
leaves as well as the shapes of airplanes and warships. Dominating the diptych,
however, is a map of the island, which, complete with inserts of smoking
factories, is set in a sea of blood, pouring from the naked form of a Taino
Indian woman. This is a reference to the family-planning policies instituted by
the Popular Democratic Party in 1980.

Antonio Martorell, the founder of the Taller Alacran, a printmaking workshop, is
represented by red, white and blue silkscreens of playing-card images as well as
a deck of cards that comments on the private lives of two prominent governors,
Roberto Sanchez Vilella and Luis Munoz Marin.

Antonio Maldonado, another distinguished figure, studied at the National School
of Fine Arts in Mexico City, and shows it in a 1973 black-and-white linocut of a
crowd celebrating the abolition of slavery in Puerto Rico 100 years earlier.
This includes portraits of key abolitionists like Samuel Betances.

These artists, together with Lorenzo Homar, who studied at, among other
institutions in the United States, the Art Students League and who in 1950
founded the Center of Puerto Rican Art, take a more Social Realist view of the
island's political history. Mr. Homar, however, is represented by both a
black-and-white woodcut of the former Nationalist Party leader, Pedro Albizu
Campos, and a silkscreen caricature in color of American tourists on the streets
of Old San Juan in the Eisenhower era.

A longer view is also provided by the Argentine printmaker, Antonio Frasconi,
whose "Los Desaparecidos" ("The Disappeared Ones") is one of several recently
published lithographs denouncing military despotism in various South American
countries.

But at a time when disaffected ethnic groups are jostling one another for media
attention, it is impossible for a bystander to determine which is suffering the
most, and inevitably, numbness sets in.

All the more reason to welcome in this show Frank Espada's straightforward
black-and-white photograph of a sharply dressed Malcolm X, surrounded by a
crowd, and what may be the strongest political statement of all, the relief
silkscreen by Luis Camnitzer. It is nothing but the black cross hairs of a rifle
sight with a blot of red close to the heart of the invisible victim and,
stenciled in black below, the words "Ejercicio Final" (or "Final Exercise").

The show continues through Oct. 2. Further information can be obtained by
calling the Lehman College Art Gallery at (718) 960-8732.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "La Isla del Encanto" by Marina Gutierrez.; "Terra Non
Descoperta" ("Undiscovered Land") by the Chilean artist Alfredo Jaar.
(Photographs from collection of El Museo del Barrio)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Postwar Hanoi

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 160 words


To the Editor: Having recently returned from there myself, I found Philip
Shenon's "Hanoi Two Decades After the War" (April 25) fascinating.  Mr. Shenon
was absolutely correct when he mentioned the dangers of the chaotic traffic; I
was hit by a bicycle near Hoan Kiem Lake. Travelers should take heed when
crossing the street.

Regarding the "Hanoi Hilton": Unlike Mr. Shenon, I had no problem getting
photographs though I noticed some of the old women did not want to have their
picture taken. I guess after a lifetime of fear it is difficult to change.

I suggest a visit to North Vietnam for the adventurous. The people are rather
friendly, but their knowledge of English is less than I expected. When in doubt,
ask the young children, as they are learning English in school. Knowledge of
French, Russian or Spanish may prove to be of some use. The landscapes are
extraordinary and the sunsets breathtaking.

DOREEN WILLIAMS
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Postwar Hanoi

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


To the Editor: In the year since I returned from six weeks exploring Vietnam, I
have read perhaps a dozen articles on this country, mostly focused on points of
interest in the southern half of Vietnam. It was with great interest that I read
Philip Shenon's article on Hanoi.

Though he detailed his trip to the Ho Chi Minh mausoleum, Mr. Shenon did not
even mention the Ho Chi Minh Museum next door. The museum was designed by a team
of three architects from Vietnam, Russia and Czechoslovakia and has been open
since late 1991. Far from being a boring propaganda showcase, it is an unusual
masterpiece presenting the life of a Vietnamese leader in the context of world
events -- cultural, political, scientific and artistic.

Unlike those in other museums I visited, the exhibits were well-labeled in
English, and in addition there were docents fluent in English to take visitors
on a tour.

I have traveled throughout Europe, the Middle East, North America and Asia and I
found the Ho Chi Minh Museum to be one of the best. Regardless of how visitors
from the United States may feel about Ho Chi Minh personally, they should not
miss the museum.

DEBORAH LERNER
Santa Monica, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Traffic in front of the Opera House in Hanoi. (Johanna Sherry
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnian in U.S., Horror Behind and New Life Ahead

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


Kareem Jakubovic fights his memories, trying to push the atrocities of Bosnia's
war from the forefront of his mind. Perhaps his anxiety about starting a new
life in the United States, he says, will distract him from worse thoughts.

Mr. Jakubovic is among the first batch of 500 refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to land in the United States. A survivor of two concentration camps
in Bosnia, he arrived in New York last week on his way to resettlement in
Detroit. He was wide-eyed at the busyness on Manhattan streets, and scoffed at
the flavor of his first beer, a Heineken, which he found watery.

Thousands are likely to follow his path here. Like other Bosnian Muslims who
fled to Croatia with the hope of returning home when the fighting died down, Mr.
Jacubovic says such a notion evaporated in recent months as the situation in
Bosnia slipped from ravaged to worse.

"My village is completely destroyed now," said Mr. Jakubovic, 28, whose light
blue eyes and tousled hair recall the actor Aidan Quinn. He grew up on a small
farm in northeastern Bosnia and ran a grocery store there until last year. "They
even smashed our chicken coop," he said. "There is nothing."

More Seek Refuge in U.S.

He shed his reluctance to speak about his most horrific memories at the urging
of the International Rescue Committee, a private relief organization whose
officers are eager to demonstrate the abundance of Bosnians needing refuge among
the more than 300,000 who fled their homes and are waiting in Croatia for
resettlement. With many European countries closing their borders to immigrants,
the committee's officers say, more and more Bosnians are now asking to come to
the United States.

Yet it is unclear how many will be allowed in. Of the 122,000 allotted spaces
for refugees this year -- including about 50,000 for the republics of the former
Soviet Union and 50,000 for Vietnam -- only 2,000 will go to Bosnians. That
allotment was reduced from 3,000 last month when the State Department announced
that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was unable to find enough
Bosnians waiting in Croatia who wanted to come.

Barbara Nagorski, vice president of the International Rescue Committee, says
there is no shortage of willing and needy refugees. The problem, she says, is
that the United Nations agency is overburdened with providing emergency aid in
Bosnia and unable to screen all those who would qualify for refugee status. A
spokeswoman for the agency in Washington agreed, saying it was running out of
funds.

A State Department official said discussions were under way with Congress on
whether the allotment for refugees from Bosnia should be increased in the fiscal
year that begins on Oct. 1. Ms. Nagorski says it should be at least 10,000.

Mr. Jakubovic realizes that he is lucky just to be alive. Several friends were
killed by the shelling that sounded the war's arrival in his home village of
Jacobovici when the Bosnian Serb militia arrived on May 24 of last year.

Camp Horrors Recalled

The Serbs aimed at the local mosque first, less than 100 yards from Mr.
Jakubovic's house, and he fled into the woods. He was captured two days later
and taken to a camp at Keraterm, where he and about 1,300 other men were crammed
into a former tile factory.

His voice dropped as he recalled the horrors he saw there, and later at another
camp in Trnopolje. A man standing beside him was shot to death for leaning over
too quickly to tie a shoelace, he said. Prisoners were tortured with cigarette
burns and beaten regularly with clubs.

Yet it was the seemingly arbitrary nature of killing in the camps that most
terrified him. He said the prisoners rarely knew why they might be taken out of
the camp, sometimes to be shot, sometimes to be transferred.

"The worst thing of all was when they were reading names of the people to go to
Omarska," he said, referring to a camp that he said was one of the most brutal
in Bosnia. "People were shaking."

One night last July, Mr. Jakubovic said, he and the 400 other men sharing his
room at Keraterm heard screams and shots fired in an adjoining section of the
camp. The Serbs had thrown a smoke bomb into a crowded room, he said, then
waited outside to shoot each man who leapt out the window to avoid suffocating.

"They set up brights lights, pointed at the windows, so they could see what they
were doing," Mr. Jakubovic said. "We thought they were going from room to room,
that we would be next. But they stopped at about 5 A.M."

After daybreak, he said, the man in charge of the camp chose four men from Mr.
Jakubovic's room to help load about 150 bodies into the back of a truck. One of
the four fell ill, vomiting at the sight of so many corpses, and another man was
called to take his place.

"They brought a fire truck, to wash away the blood," Mr. Jakubovic said.

Making sense of the ethnic rivalries, centuries old but suppressed in recent
decades, seems difficult for Mr. Jakubovic. His conversation became rigid, and
contradictory, when he spoke about Serbs.

"The Serbs are all guilty," he asserted at one point, only to add a few moments
later, "I don't really blame all Serbs." And then: "They are all the same,"
followed by: "It's a mess. I don't know what to think."

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kareem Jakubovic, a survivor of two concentration camps in
Bosnia, is among the first batch of Bosnian refugees to land in the United
States. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POTBOILERS;
True Confession: Steamy Books Are Best in the Heat

BYLINE: By ALEX WITCHEL

SECTION: Section 14; Page 4; Column 1; Summer Times Supplement

LENGTH: 1265 words


IT beckons, the color of poppies. Its opium curls through the air, fixing you in
its path. You cannot resist -- you never could -- and when surrender comes, you
want to cry for joy because now, against all odds, you will finally be together.
Always. So you reach out, fingers trembling, and grasp it eagerly, in both
hands.

"Scruples Two."

Look, it may not mean much to you, but this particular sighting signals my
summer freedom. The rest of the year I'm good. In the three seconds I have left
each week after reading the requisite newspapers and magazines, I truly make an
effort. I read smart writers, genuine voices. If Truman Capote were alive, I'd
support him in his old age.

But here, among the stacks at Barnes & Noble (do you think I'd be caught dead
buying this book at Endicott?) I feel the pull of summer and its welcome
release. Even more to the point, the pull of late summer. A reading list
composed around Memorial Day tends to smack of the earnest. "Turmoil and
Triumph: My Years as Secretary of State," by George P. Shultz? You're already
using it for at-home step aerobics. "Bleak House"? Save it for the first frost.
"Bankruptcy 1995: The Coming Collapse of America and How to Stop It"? A laugh a
minute.

All you've done is fill your beach bag with schoolbooks. Try this instead: "Each
kiss sensitized her to the next, each kiss was followed by a studious
exploration of her face with his lips, first her ear lobes, from which he
removed her earrings one by one before he took each dainty lobe and sucked it .
. . learning it with his lips, his tongue and his grazing, careful teeth." Now,
that's impressive. How many men even think of removing earrings, much less with
their lips? I wonder if her ears are pierced.

There are other options, if you feel superior to Judith Krantz and me, but I
must tell you, you don't know what you're missing. I haven't yet read "Scruples
Two"; I'm saving it for the very last week in August. But I can tell you, based
on her other books, that Mrs. Krantz, (an alumna of Wellesley College, you
snobs) offers, besides sex, a good love story and fabulous, and I do mean
fabulous, clothes. (Every woman knows that a good clothes fantasy is the only
thing to rival a good sex fantasy. If your air-conditioner is broken, it might
even be better.)

And no, these books are not necessarily for women only. On my third date with my
husband, who reads more history, politics and literature than most college
professors, he came right out and admitted that he had read Rona Jaffe's "Class
Reunion" and liked it. I was enchanted.

Because no matter how intellectual you are, or try to be, you have to have some
fun sometimes. And if not now, in these waning summer weeks, when? A recent
stroll through the racks prompted some random thoughts and suggestions, by no
means scientific or complete. So let loose a little. Tolstoy can wait.

On my list:

John Grisham: I may be one of the few people in the country who has not read
this man. He is a favorite of my 13-year-old stepson, who resented all
differences between the book "The Firm" and the movie. He recommends Mr.
Grisham's "Pelican Brief," about the murders of two Supreme Court justices. I
will try it, although I make him no promises about finishing it if I get too
scared.

Stephen McCauley: "The Easy Way Out." I want to read this book even though I
don't know anything about it because I loved his first novel, "The Object of My
Affection."

Glenn Savan: "Goldman's Anatomy." Same as above. I have no clue as to content,
but I liked "White Palace" so much -- and so much more than the movie.

Colin Harrison: "Bodies Electric," which everyone says is terrific and
un-put-downable, which automatically worries me because I know I won't do
anything else until I finish it. Potential obsessions must be wisely timed.

Robert Olen Butler: "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain," a collection of
stories about Vietnam by this year's surprise Pulitzer Prize-winner who lives in
a part of Louisiana that he says reminds him of Vietnam. I really must travel
more.

Dominick Dunne: "A Season in Purgatory," his newest best seller, supposedly
inspired by the William Kennedy Smith trial. Ever since "The Two Mrs.
Grenvilles," I know I can count on Mr. Dunne to tell terrific stories about the
kind of people who own Aubusson rugs. I hope one day to meet someone who
actually owns an Aubusson rug so I'll know what it is, besides expensive.

Mona Simpson: "The Lost Father," the sequel to her breathtaking novel "Anywhere
but Here," about the loving and truly sick relationship every daughter has with
her mother. Why miss Dad's turn?

On my list, but maybe after Labor Day:

Alice Hoffman: Anything. I've never read her and I'm not sure I deserve to live
if I don't soon. But I may not be motivated to try something new until fall.

Jane Smiley: Ditto.

Dorothy Allison: "Bastard Out of Carolina." Ditto.

Susanna Kaysen: "Girl, Interrupted." Ditto.

Deborah Laake: "Secret Ceremonies: A Mormon Woman's Intimate Diary of Marriage
and Beyond." I must admit, I'm curious. One of my best friends in high school
was Mormon, and she used to come to our house to sneak cups of coffee. I'd like
to find out what the rest of her family was up to.

Not on my list:

Ivana Trump: Not even in this lifetime. And I've read Roxanne Pulitzer.

David McCullough: "Truman." Cliffs Notes, anyone?

All books on Prince Charles and Princess Diana: The conversations on their phone
tapes are so desperately dreary that eavesdropping on the neighbors has more
entertainment potential.

James Clavell: "Gai-Jin." "Shogun: The Musical" was enough.

List aside, I await late August. Come Labor Day, I will know absolutely
everything about Billy Ikehorn, "the owner of Scruples, a Beverly Hills
boutique"; Vito Orsini, her husband, "tyrannical yet a charmer, who is more
flawed than Billy realized before their quick marriage"; Spider Elliott, "a wise
and merry California golden boy who adores women and can read their minds," and
Valentine O'Neill, "the brilliant young designer for Scruples who is half Irish
but French as the Eiffel Tower. She is alert as a vixen, hot-tempered, lovable,
and as difficult to pin down as a mermaid."

I'll bet she's the one with the ear lobes. And her wardrobe? Absolutely divine.



A READING LIST FOR BEACH BAGS

ANYWHERE BUT HERE, by Mona Simpson, Alfred A. Knopf, $18.95, Random House,
paper, $9.95.

BASTARD OUT OF CAROLINA, by Dorothy Allison, Dutton, $20.

BODIES ELECTRIC, by Colin Harrison, Crown Publishing Group, $20.

CLASS REUNION, by Rona Jaffe, Dell Publishing, $5.99

THE EASY WAY OUT, by Stephen McCauley, Simon & Schuster, $19.50.

THE FIRM, by John Grisham, Doubleday, $19.95, Dell Publishing, paper, $5.99.

GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen, Random House, $17.

GOLDMAN'S ANATOMY, by Glenn Savan, Doubleday, $22.

A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN, by Robert Olen Butler, Henry Holt, $19.95,
Viking, paper, $10.

THE LOST FATHER, by Mona Simpson, Knopf, $22, Vintage Press, paper, $12.

THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, by Stephen McCauley, Pocket Books, $10.

THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham, Doubleday, $22.50, Dell Publishing, paper,
$6.99.

A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne, Crown Publishing Group, $22.

SCRUPLES TWO, by Judith Krantz, Crown Publishing Group, $22.

SECRET CEREMONIES: A MORMON WOMAN'S INTIMATE DIARY OF MARRIAGE AND BEYOND, by
Deborah Laake, William Morrow & Company, $20.

THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne, Bantam, paper, $5.95.

WHITE PALACE, by Glenn Savan, Bantam, paper, $9.95.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 943 words



International    A2-8

ISRAEL RETALIATES IN LEBANON
Israeli aircraft fired a barrage of rockets at guerrilla sites in Lebanon,
retaliating for recent attacks that have killed Israeli soldiers.  A1

CHINA DENIES TREATY VIOLATION
China's Foreign Minister denied that Beijing had violated an agreement that bars
it from exporting missile technology, but it was unclear whether the Chinese had
denied selling missile parts to Pakistan.  A2


DARK HINTS ABOUT SANDINISTAS
Diplomats in Nicaragua say an attack by ex-Sandinista soldiers suggests
complicity at the highest levels of the country's army, which remains under
Sandinista control.  A3

ZULU CHIEF IS LOSING GROUND
In his campaign to keep the Zulu homeland from being digested into a new South
African order, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi has been losing ground.  A3

U.S. MISSILE FIRED AT IRAQI SITE
A U.S. warplane fired a missile at an antiaircraft battery in southern Iraq that
was preparing to shoot down the plane, the Pentagon said.  A6

BOSNIAN SERBS BREAK CEASE-FIRE
Bosnian Serb forces around Sarajevo broke a cease-fire soon after it took effect
with heavy artillery barrages, including a bombardment of French troops.  A7

RUBLE SHIFT CREATES A SPLIT
Russia's Finance Ministry protested to President Boris N. Yeltsin over the
sudden decision by the Central Bank to declare all pre-1993 ruble bank notes
invalid.  A8

Western economists criticized Russia's Central Bank.  A8

UKRAINE HINTS AT NUCLEAR SHIFT
Ukraine's Defense Minister suggested that his country might try to join the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty with the status of a "transition country" with
atomic arms.  A8

Berlin Journal: A railway station as memorial.  A4

Jean-Bertrand Aristide has nominated a prime minister.  A3

National    A9-13

POVERTY PLAN TIED TO BUDGET
Almost completely lost in the talk about taxes and deficits is that the budget
agreement working its way through Congress would significantly enlarge a Federal
antipoverty program.  A1

LAYOFFS BY THE PROFITABLE
The news that Procter & Gamble will shrink its work force underscored a
surprising aspect of America's jobs crisis: Profitable companies are also
shedding jobs.  A1

THE POLITICS OF EXERCISE
Many politicians start jogs with President Clinton, but few finish, finding Mr.
Clinton a deceptively fast runner. For some, the goal is to pant and persist
until the photographers finish.  A1

IN SEARCH OF DRY RAILS
Midwestern flooding is costing the country's railroads tens of millions of
dollars. But the freight is getting through on other routes.  A1

Nearly 80,000 residents of St. Joseph, Mo., lost water.  A10

PLAN TO SELL LOS ANGELES AIRPORT
The new Mayor of Los Angeles wants to lease the city's international airport and
use the income to pay for more municipal services. But some Congressmen object.
A9

PLANES' AIR-QUALITY STUDIED
Prompted by reports that airlines are trying to save money by using less fresh
air in airplane cabins, a House panel planned an investigation of air quality on
planes A9

NEW PRESIDENT, NEW JOKES
Stand-up comedians, many of of whom are liberals and baby boomers, are
nonetheless finding Bill Clinton an easy target.  A12

DEMOCRATS BOW ON BUDGET PLAN
Democratic liberals and conservatives conceded what is becoming obvious: The
Clinton Administration's $500 billion package of tax increases and spending cuts
will pass.  A12

 AIDE'S FALL FROM VIEW
Washington at Work: George Stephanopoulos has gone from a symbol of a hip young
Presidency to a symbol of the Clinton Administration's problems.  A13

Butte Journal: A synagogue in the Wild West celebrates 90 years.  A9

Metro Digest    B1

A NEW YORK VOTE ON PUERTO RICO
Seeking to participate in the debate over statehood for Puerto Rico, a group of
Hispanic elected officials in New York announced plans to hold a separate vote.
A1

Business Digest    D1

Sports    C1-10

Baseball: Yanks come back from 8-0 deficit. C1
Coleman entangled in firecracker incident. C1
Mets shut out Dodgers. C4
Giants beat Phillies. C4
Red Sox defeat A's. C4
Basketball: Riley pleased with Anthony. C2
Columns: Berkow on troubled high school recruit. C2
Cycling: Indurain wins Tour de France. C3
Football: Questions of defense for Giants. C8
Fresh start for Jets' Johnson. C8
Golf: Merten pulls out victory in women's Open. C1
Horse Racing: Stampede is on to Saratoga. C2
Soccer: Mexico shuts out U.S. C4
Sports People: C10
Tennis: Capriati beats Fernandez. C9

Arts/Entertainment    C11-16

Three festivals in Provence.  C11
A film maker on Vietnam.  C11
Music: Vladimir Feltsman.  C14
Dick Hyman plays Jelly Roll Morton.  C12
Mexican rock at S.O.B.'s.  C14
Ultramarine at Limelight.  C14
Nirvana at Roseland.  C16
Dance: Jacob's Pillow.  C11
The Wave Hill series.  C12
Books: "The Hidden Life of Dogs." C16
Television: Bochco defends "N.Y.P.D. Blue." C11

Obituaries    B8

Dr. Abram Leon Sachar, the first president of Brandeis University.
Henry A. Scheel, an innovative yacht designer.
E. Adamson Hoebel, anthropologist who studied pre-literate societies.

Editorials/Op-Ed    A14-15

Editorials

A budget worthy of Mr. Bush.
The power of water.
Superfluous subs.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Looking to the Pacific.
Grover Joseph Rees: Boat people deserve better.
Daniel Mendelsohn: Republicans can be cured!
Doron Weber: The best and the guiltiest.

Chronicle    B6

Bridge    C14

Crossword    C16

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Politicians Find Jogging With Clinton Is No Stroll in the Park

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


Representative Bob Filner stopped jogging about four years ago because of a bad
back. But when word came that President Clinton planned to spend the night in
San Diego, the freshman lawmaker didn't think twice about inviting himself along
for an early morning jaunt on the Coronado beach.

Not timid about seizing a political opportunity, Mr. Filner, who is 50, said:
"It's a status thing. I thought there'd be some interesting pictures taken that
I could use to talk about in a fun way with my constituents."

Little did the California Democrat know that Mr. Clinton, whom he thought
"looked like a big lug," would outpace and outlast him. The President was
unusually speedy that day because he did not want to be shown up by a group of
Navy Seals who had joined them. So an out-of-breath and out-of-shape Mr. Filner
dropped out after the first of four miles. The only pictures his constituents
saw were cartoons in the local paper poking fun at his athletic prowess.

Politicians like Mr. Filner may think New Balance has something to do with the
New World Order, and they may never exercise, but they cannot seem to resist
trying to jog with the President.

Even the President of South Korea, Kim Young Sam, insisted that he jog with Mr.
Clinton when the President was recently in Seoul, after delicate negotiations
over speed, timing and dress. (Aides, fearful that his usual baggy shorts would
offend Koreans, had Mr. Clinton put on a full-length running suit.)

Some politicians are seeking simply to borrow some Presidential prestige, others
come to build good will with the President or to lobby him on particular issues.
Most will say, of course, that they simply want to get in shape.

"Jogging with the President," said Steve Rabinowitz, a White House aide, "is
bigger than an audience in the Oval."

But like Mr. Filner, many would-be runners underestimate the President's
endurance and speed (he usually runs about three eight-minute miles). The White
House now provides a "straggler van" to pick up people who conk out. And aides
try to warn prospective runners that the President is no slug.

"On T.V., he looks a little like he's plodding along, but it's not like a stroll
in the park," said Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary, who no longer
jogs with the President because he is too quick for her. "He's deceptively
fast."

Judy Collins, the singer and political enthusiast, spent most of her time in the
straggler van. Richard J. Riordan, the new Mayor of Los Angeles, also ended up
in it, emerging only when he spotted photographers. (His photo with the
President was played prominently in The Los Angeles Times the next morning.)

So did Representative Cynthia McKinney of Georgia, who had not exercised in
years. She prepared for her jog by buying a running outfit and doing some
sit-ups the night before.

'Kicking Up Dust'

"I thought he'd chug along like a caboose," she said. "I thought it was an
opportunity to see the President laid back and kicking back. But he was kicking
up dust, and leaving me in the wind."

Susie Rodriquez, Ms. McKinney's press secretary, who also went on the run at
Hains Point on the Potomac River, recalled, "I said, 'Cynthia, there are a bunch
of press people, just try to make it to the first cameras.' "

Ms. McKinney said she was near collapse when the van picked her up and took her
to the end point. That way, the freshman Democrat still got what she came for:
her picture with Mr. Clinton.

The politics of exercise is nothing new.

President Lyndon B. Johnson demanded that politicians and aides swim with him in
the raw. President Richard M. Nixon was not the sporting type, though he did
bowl. President Gerald R. Ford liked to take people golfing and skiing.
President Jimmy Carter was so into tennis (or micromanaging) that he personally
controlled who played on the White House courts. President George Bush was
better known for his horseshoe game than running, though he once lectured the
"slovenly" press corps for not running with him.

But for the 1993 political set, jogging at 7 A.M. with the President is the most
fashionable. As often as five days a week, Mr. Clinton can be seen wearing a
different baseball cap every day as he tries new routes through the streets of
Washington, or whatever city he is visiting. He runs with a pack of supporter
and friends, plus reporters and the ever-present Secret Service contingent.

With all the attention, Mr. Clinton and his partners sometimes get distracted.
One morning, the President saved Representative Mike Synar, Democrat of
Oklahoma, from being run over by pulling him back by the arm from traffic as
they were both jogging in the middle of a congested Washington street. Mr. Synar
returned the favor minutes later, saving Mr. Clinton from being squashed by a
Volkswagen.

Not one who likes to run around in circles, at least not when it comes to
athletics, the President rarely uses the $30,000 jogging track built for him on
the South Lawn with private donations.

"The track is very good in bad weather," Mr. Clinton told reporters during a run
on the Mall one morning. "It's also very good for me at night or after dark, if
I want to run. It's too much of a burden on the Service for me to run at night."


Oval Office Tour, Too

Marcia Hale, the White House scheduler, said she kept a list of politicians who
ask to jog or people the President wants to join him. Sometimes, she said, the
Congressional liaison office comes up with names of lawmakers who might like to
be asked to jog. "He usually brings them back for a tour of the Oval Office
before they leave," she said.

Since Mr. Clinton takes his jogging seriously -- he once called it "my thinking
time" -- it is not until he is back in the Oval Office that he converses much
with his running mates.

On the eve of the most recent budget vote in the Senate, Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska, who was wavering, said he and the President, both in their shorts,
"talked a great deal after the run about policy, about trade, about Vietnam."

The politics of exercise is, of course, a two-way street. Mr. Clinton knows the
importance of building relationships (and winning votes) in informal settings.
Who knows why Mr. Kerrey, who was wearing a "Hillary Knows Best" T-shirt, ended
up voting with Mr. Clinton on the budget? Did they bond on the run?

By running in Vancouver, Canada, with Lieut. Gen. Barry R. McCaffery, who had
been snubbed by a young White House aide weeks earlier, Mr. Clinton sought to
repair strained relations with the Army brass.

A Serious Golfer

While Mr. Clinton runs to burn off calories, the sport he really seems to enjoy
is golf. So securing a golf invitation with the President -- and as many as six
hours of his time -- is more difficult. He tries to play once a week, and his
partners say Mr. Clinton is very competitive, always keeping careful score.

Representative Dan Glickman of Kansas, who golfed with Mr. Clinton last week,
said: "I did not lobby him for any water projects in my district or anything
like that. He's a serious golfer, and he hits the ball quite far, actually."

Before he took to the course, Mr. Glickman got some unsolicited advice from his
father: "Don't beat the President. It's not smart business."

But as it happened, on the par-4 second hole, Mr. Glickman fired a long iron
into the hole on his second shot, taking the President's breath away with the
first eagle of his life.

"It was a dream," Mr. Glickman said. Was he worried that the President won't
invite him back? "I'm hoping the President will respect me more because I tried
to do my best," Mr. Glickman said.

Some politicians know their limits, like Representative Lynn Schenk, Democrat of
California. The White House, wanting to be even handed, asked her to jog with
the President after Mr. Filner invited himself along during the President's trip
to California. Though Ms. Schenk clearly envied Mr. Filner for the extra time he
got with the President, she turned down the offer.

"I am not a jogger," the 38-year-old lawmaker said. "I'm not a photo opportunity
kind of person. I am at an age where I have better sense than to make a fool of
myself."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jogging with President Clinton is wrongly assumed to be an easy
photo-op. Richard J. Riordan, left, Mayor of Los Angeles, ran only when he saw
photographers. (Reuters/Bettmann) The pace with Navy Seals in Coronado, Calif.,
above (Associated Press), sidelined Representative Bob Filner before
photographers arrived. "I thought he'd chug along like a caboose," said
Representative Cynthia McKinney of Georgia. (Reuters/Bettmann) (pg. A1); Senator
Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who went jogging with President Clinton on the eve of
the most recent budget vote, said the two "talked a great deal after the run
about policy, about trade, about Vietnam." (Reuters) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Nicaraguans Say the Army Had a Hand in Attack

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: ESTELI, Nicaragua, July 25


At first blush, the attack of former Sandinista soldiers against this provincial
town last week appeared to be a simple affair, but almost as soon as the guns
went quiet a darker picture of intrigue and betrayal began to emerge.

Diplomats say that a closer examination of the attack strongly suggests
complicity at the highest levels of the country's army, which remain under
Sandinista control although the Sandinistas lost the elections in 1990.

Many residents of this town, long a Sandinista bastion, say they believe
theattack by disgruntled, demobilized Sandinistas on Wednesday was planned,
mounted and terminated with the involvement of the country's armed forces. The
resurrected Sandinistas, who used to refer to one another as companeros, now
call themselves the "Re-compas."

"From inside it sounded as if the Vietnam War was being fought all over again,"
said one of the town's businessmen, describing the Nicaraguan Army's recapture
of Esteli on Thursday amid the boom and clatter of helicopters firing rockets
and thick streams of automatic-weapons fire. "But when you took a peek outside,
you realized that most of the shooting was aimed at the sky. Then, when the
Government decided they wanted to end it, suddenly they just cleaned up."

$4 Million Reported Taken

In the capital, Managua, diplomats said that the attack on Esteli had been
openly planned for weeks by a former Sandinista major, Victor Manuel Gallegos.
Major Gallegos escaped unharmed in broad daylight with a reported $4 million
stolen from local banks.

Diplomats and many Nicaraguans who see the fighting in Esteli as another sign
that the country's transition to democracy is veering dangerously toward
failure, say that the attack on the town reveals the complex layers of rivalry
and betrayal common in the increasingly violent shadow games of Nicaraguan
politics.

The army commander, Gen. Humberto Ortega, a Sandinista whose retention of his
command after the opposition won democratic elections in 1990 has been a steady
source of tension, strongly denied army involvement in the attack on the town.

Instead, he proclaimed the operation a great success for the army and condemned
the Government for creating conditions that were seeding violence in the
country.

Lack of Help Noted

For months, the 78,000 demobilized Sandinista soldiers and 23,000 former Contra
rebels have been grumbling that despite a series of pardons and promises of
economic aid the Government has done little to generate economic growth or help
in their return to productive civilian life.

Some diplomats and Nicaraguans say General Ortega, the brother of Daniel Ortega,
the President under Sandinista rule, faced mounting opposition from disgruntled
former Sandinista soldiers who had fallen under the sway of the more radical
elements of their political movement.

Among their grievances is the complaint that by participating in the Government
of the civilian President, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the Sandinista movement
is discrediting itself.

Despite the fact that the Government is widely seen as broadly accommodating in
its approach to the Sandinistas, Daniel Ortega delivered a fiery speech last
week in which he warned that only profound changes would allow the Government to
survive the remaining three years of its six-year term. Far from an attempt to
distance the Sandinistas from the Government, Mr. Ortega's speech was viewed by
many here as a bid for a senior role for himself.

General Ortega recently urged Mrs. Chamorro to extend a pardon to more radical
Sandinista elements in an effort to neutralize them, diplomats said.

Attack Publicly Announced

Having failed to obtain the pardon, diplomats say, General Ortega allowed the
Re-compas' attack on Esteli to proceed, even though it had been publicly
announced at least two weeks in advance.

Supporting this view, the diplomats say, is the fact that the buses carrying the
120 or so Re-compas into Esteli passed unmolested by the army camp at the city's
gates. Furthermore, soldiers based in and around the town waited at least three
hours before responding.

When the time came to put an end to the operation, army soldiers killed a
reported 41 of the rebels, who many say had been led to expect more gentle
treatment by their former comrades.  In one sweep, diplomats said, General
Ortega eliminated potentially troublesome rivals and positioned himself as
savior of the nation's order and security.

"This whole thing is about as cynical as you can get," said a Latin American
diplomat. "We had meetings with soldiers and police in Esteli 10 days ago who
told us this attack was coming. What we are talking about here is the sacrifice
of lives: the lives of the rebels, the lives of the soldiers, but mostly the
sacrifice of lives of ordinary people."

Former Contras Take Up Arms

While the army has flirted with the Re-compas, Nicaragua's conservative
politicians have forged ties with the former Contras, formerly supported by the
United States, who now call themseles Re-Contras. They too have increasingly
begun to take up arms.

In the most striking example of these ties, the Vice President, Virgilio Godoy
Reyes, an outspoken critic of his own Government's collaboration with the
Sandinistas, recently traveled to areas patrolled by these rebels to visit with
their leaders.

"They wanted to express their grievances at the highest level, and I just went
to hear them out," Mr. Godoy said, defending himself in an interview against
widespread criticisms.

Critics of Mr. Godoy and other conservative politicians like him say they are
providing moral and perhaps other kinds of support to the Re-Contras,
encouraging them to build up a force that could act as a proxy in a political
struggle against the Government of Mrs. Chamorro, which conservatives say long
ago sold out to the Sandinistas. The Re-Contras have also drawn sustenance
recently from volatile groups of anti-Castro Cuban exiles based in Miami, which
have openly acknowledged sending them money.

Operating in a broad band of territory in the north of the country, the
Re-Contras, who claim to number 4,800, but are widely believed to be
considerably fewer, have many of the same grievances as their former Sandinista
Army enemies: the lack of land, credits and jobs. On top of this, however, the
most emotionally potent element of discontent for many of the Re-Contras is the
slaying of what they estimate to be 200 of their comrades at the hands of the
Sandinista Army since the civil war ended.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents of Esteli, Nicaragua, say there was more to an attack
on the town last week than the anger of demobilized Sandinista fighters.
Diplomats, too, see evidence of involvement by the country's armed forces, which
remain under Sandinista control. Army soldiers fought on the streets on
Thursday. (Associated Press)

Map of Nicaragua shows location of Esteli.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MIDWEST FLOODING;
Town Fends Off the Flood, But Awakes Without Water

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: ST. JOSEPH, Mo., July 25


When Conrad Wilcoxson went into the bathroom to shave early this morning, the
only thing he got from the tap was a hiss of air.

"I knew right then that we had big trouble in St. Joe," he recalled. "Nothing
came out. Nothing."

Overnight, Mr. Wilcoxson, along with the 76,000 other residents of St. Joseph,
had become victims of the latest of the lengthening string of disasters
perpetrated on the sodden Middle West by the '93 flood.

Sometime in the darkness, the engorged Missouri River had slipped the strained
levees built to protect this quiet little city, situated 50 miles upstream from
Kansas City and best known as the starting point of the Pony Express. Before
frantic sandbagging could stem the wave, some of the overflow made its way into
the water plant on the northern outskirts of town.

That forced an emergency shutdown, and with it emergency reliance on severely
rationed water trucked in from other cities.

10 Gallons a Day

Not since the Des Moines water plant was inundated a couple of weeks back has
there been a worse drinking-water crisis in the flooding.

"I don't know how much more of this stuff we can take out here," Mr. Wilcoxson
said, standing in line this morning at a shopping mall for his ration of 10
gallons.

Certainly, this weekend has been one of the worst in the six weeks of flooding.

Some of the heaviest rains to date turned the northwestern corner of Missouri
and neighboring parts of Iowa, Kansas and Nebraska into a soggy bog. In the
process, the Midwest flood zone was expanded to its biggest proportions so far
this year.

Worse, weather forecasters continue to predict scattered downpours followed by
periods of punishing heat and sun.

In the next few days, record levels are expected up and down the Missouri, not
just here but in places like Kansas City and Jefferson City, the state capital,
as well.

Strained Levees

Over on the Mississippi, drenching rain that fell on Iowa this weekend is
sending record crests downstream toward St. Louis and points south. In that
heavily populated stretch of river, the levees and floodwalls are beginning to
sprout worrisome leaks that more sandbags and rocks can barely control.

Along less populated stretches of river there were major levee failures today.
One occurred on the Sny Island levee, which runs along the southern Illinois
side of the river from New Canton south for 54 miles. Hundreds, and at times,
thousands of volunteers had spent nearly a month strengthening that berm, which
was intended to hold back the Mississippi from 110,000 acres of some of the
nation's richest farmland. The authorities said 44,000 acres were now under
water.

Another failure occurred 50 miles south of St. Louis near Perryville and
McBride, sending flood waters over farmlands and into a few small towns. A sand
boil grew into a gaping hole around 3:30 A.M., said Jack Lakenan, emergency
management director for Perry County.

"A Corps of Engineers worker and his pickup truck fell into the crater made by
the boil, and he escaped the truck by climbing out of the window and into the
water," Mr. Lakenan said.

Also over the weekend, flooding caused six more deaths, bringing the total loss
of lives so far to 42. And disaster officials are saying that the new flooding
will probably push the flood's monetary damage past $12 billion. That would make
it one of the two or three most costly natural disasters in the country's
history.

"I've seen flooding and I've seen flooding," Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy
lamented today after a tour of flooded southern Illinois. "But this takes me to
a whole new level. We have more than a disaster. We have a calamity."

The Federal Government, he warned, did not have pockets deep enough to provide
all the aid needed to fully rehabilitate the region.

Conrad Wilcoxson was already resigned to that kind of warning.

"I can muddle through," he said, shuffling along in the water line. "Well, you
know, I've just got to muddle through. All of us in St. Joe will just have to
muddle through. We'll do it."

1,300 Evacuated

In a sense, St. Joseph lucked out when its water plant went down. Unlike Des
Moines, which is still struggling with its water service, St. Joseph stopped the
flooding before it could short out water purification pumps and before filthy
river flotsam could contaminate the city's pipe system.

The city was also spared, at least for the moment, serious flooding in its
residential areas, though a levee across the river at Elwood, Kan., gave way,
forcing the pell-mell evacuation of 1,300 people.

Still, for all its luck when so many others are literally going under, St.
Joseph is in big trouble. City officials said after a preliminary view of the
partially submerged water plant that the system might be down for several days
or more.

And so it was that today shortly before noon, Mr. Wilcoxson, a construction
worker with a day's growth of charcoal stubble sprouting from his chin, found
himself standing in a line with 200 neighbors, unwilling, and unwashed
supplicants for water.

A hundred or so people up the ragged line -- a good hour's wait under a mean
July sun -- a national guardsman stationed next to a tank truck was struggling
with the rationing. It was no easy task to keep the snaking stream of precious
liquid flowing smoothly into the pitiful parade of milk jugs, fish bowls and
garbage cans.

"Stay in line! Stay in line!" the guardsman called out. "That way, nobody will
get upset."

Next to the tap he controlled rested a sign. It read:

"Ten gallons per household. Please limit to 1 visit per day. Bring your own
clean container. Remember boiling for 3 minutes."

The boiling was a necessary precaution, city officials said, because there was
no time to sterilize the tank trucks that hauled in the emergency supplies.

Mr. Wilcoxson shuffled forward a step or two, waving to a friend passing with a
tub brimming with a ration of water.

"Got mine!" the friend shouted, a big smile creasing his face.

Mr. Wilcoxson shuffled forward another step or two.

Then, as it always does in such situations, the inevitable happened.

The flow from the tanker slowed to a trickle, then stopped altogether.

Empty.

The news swept down the line faster than a flash flood.

But the guardsman was prepared.

"There's another truck on the way!" he called out in his most authoritative
military voice. "Stay calm. Everybody will get some."

A few people began to drift out of line toward their cars and nearby patches of
shade. But most stayed, determined to muddle through, just as Mr. Wilcoxson had
predicted.

"Seems like I've spent most of my life standing in lines," Mr. Wilcoxson said.
"I'm an old marine. Humped my way through Vietnam on three or four canteens of
water a day. Give me a couple of gallons today, and I can make it for a couple
of days or so if I have to. Probably longer."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In St. Joseph, Mo., residents lined up to get water from a
truck after the city shut down the water supply; Josh Morris, a security
volunteer, standing on a wall of sandbags as he yells for two people in a raft
to come to shore in Parkville, Mo. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times).

Map of Missouri shows location of St. Joseph.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Film Maker's Connections Between 2 Cultures

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


Landing an interview with Pham Van Dong is not easy. When Tiana, an American
actress and film maker born in Vietnam, announced to journalists in Ho Chi Minh
City that she would be talking to the former premier, who retired in 1986, the
reaction was skeptical. No one could interview Mr. Dong. In fact, many
journalists were convinced that he was dead.

Yet there he is in Tiana's autobiographical documentary, "From Hollywood to
Hanoi," artfully evading awkward questions about Communist rule in Vietnam,
pointedly shifting the discussion to the higher plane of Vietnamese poetry.

Tiana, a daughter of South Vietnam's onetime information minister (her name
throughout childhood was Thi Thanh Nga), appears to have a talent for the
unusual encounter. In making her film, which is now playing at the Film Forum,
she persuaded Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who commanded the American troops
during the Vietnam War, to submit to an interview wearing a peaked Vietnamese
straw hat. She was received by Le Duc Tho, who headed North Vietnam's delegation
to the Paris peace talks; he explained why he had refused to accept the Nobel
Peace Prize with Henry A. Kissinger, then Secretary of State, in 1975. She
charmed her way into the home of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, architect of North
Vietnam's military victory.

To Vietnam's leaders, she bore sad news. "They asked me a lot of questions about
American film stars," said Tiana, who was herself interviewed recently in her
temporary office, a single room at Du Art Film Labs on West 55th Street in
Manhattan. "Le Duc Tho wanted to know how Humphrey Bogart was doing. When I told
him, 'Well, he's dead,' he said: 'Oh. Please send condolences." General Giap and
his wife had recently seen "Gone With the Wind" and inquired about Clark Gable.

Taking Her Own Path

The Bogart story might serve as a metaphor for the scrambled cultural signals
bouncing back and forth between the United States and Vietnam, two nations that,
Tiana said, are now "tied in blood."

For Tiana, who is in her 30's, the blood tie is unusually close. In early
childhood, she shuttled back and forth between Saigon, as Ho Chi Minh City was
then called, and Washington, where her father was posted in the early 1960's. In
1966, disillusioned with the corruption of the South Vietnamese Government and
convinced that the North would win the war, her father left Vietnam for good,
taking his family with him.

She led a privileged childhood, speaking French and English at home in
Washington, where her family was part of the diplomatic subculture. She had a
driver and a bodyguard at her disposal. Her parents planned for her to attend
Harvard or the Sorbonne en route to a career in law or medicine.

From an early age, Tiana sent out clear signals that she was working on a
different plan. She started with ballet lessons. Then, because she was too short
for ballet, she took up martial arts, her first ticket to celebrity. Small but
determined, she began winning contest after contest. "I was the karate princess
of D.C.," she said.

It was in high school, in the Virginia suburbs of Washington, that she began to
wonder about her place in American society. Encouraged by her parents to
assimilate, she regarded the Vietnamese on the television news as "them" and
American soldiers as "us." "But at school, kids would say, 'What are you, a gook
or a V.C.?' " she said. " 'Vietnamese' was not a feel-good word, and I felt
better being an American."

After finishing high school at 15, she took off for Hollywood in hot pursuit of
a film career. The parts she received were not encouraging. In brief film clips,
"From Hollywood to Hanoi" gives a sampler of Tiana's performances, usually as a
kung-fu cutie in low-budget action features, using the stage name Tiana
Alexandra.

In Hollywood, she continued studying martial arts with Bruce Lee, then still an
unknown. "I was his only female student," Tiana said. "He was very chauvinistic.
He kept saying: 'Why do you want to learn self-defense? You shouldn't be out at
night alone anyway. You should be with your older brother.' "

Between films, Tiana made martial-arts exercise videos, commercials and
French-language music videos for Warner's under the name Tiana Banana. "I was
the multi-media brat," she said.

Then Vietnam intervened. Growing up, she had been encouraged to forget her
native land. "The first appreciation of my country came not from my parents, but
from Vietnam vets," she said, and from documentary films like "Hearts and
Minds." A turning point came in 1987, when she attended a program of films from
Vietnam at the University of California at Los Angeles and met a Vietnamese who
had written a screenplay satirizing the Vietnamese Government. She said: "I
thought, 'How long has this been going on? I've got to find out more about
this.' And that night I arranged with some Vietnam vets that we'd go over
there."

The Journey Home

In January 1988, she made an exploratory trip with several Vietnam veterans,
including Oliver Stone, who encouraged her to make a film.

After returning to Los Angeles and selling her belongings, she went back to
Vietnam with a cameraman. She trained a Vietnamese crew, then began roaming the
country with no fixed plan.

In 12 visits over the next three years, she talked to Government officials,
survivors of the My Lai massacre and doctors treating victims of Agent Orange.
She visited nightclubs and homes. She looked up her tough, unrepentant uncle,
recently released from the re-education camps.

Tiana's project, intended to reconcile her Vietnamese and American identities,
drove a wedge between her and her father, who now works with Amerasian children
in San Jose, Calif., and remains bitterly opposed to the current Vietnamese
Government. After seeing the film, he asked his daughter why she had not devoted
time to the story of the boat people, or the atrocities committed by the
Communist Government.

"These things are true, and they happened," Tiana said. "But the story has been
told. What hasn't been told is the story of the people we left behind, and the
people who chose to stay behind."

NAME: Tiana

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tiana, an American film maker born in Vietnam, produced "From
Hollywood to Hanoi," an autobiographical documentary. (Jack Manning/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China Denies Violating Pact By Selling Arms to Pakistan

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, July 25


At a meeting with United States officials, Foreign Minister Qian Qichen of China
denied today that Beijing had violated an international arms control agreement
that bars it from exporting missile technology, a senior Administration official
said. But it was unclear whether the Chinese had denied selling parts for M-11
missiles to Pakistan.

Mr. Qian also said China was willing to discuss a proposal by President Clinton
that all countries with nuclear arms suspend testing of the weapons, the
official said.

Though the official declined to provide details of a meeting between Secretary
of State Warren Christopher and Mr. Qian, it was clear from his comments that
Mr. Christopher had failed to get an explanation of whether China had sold the
missile parts to Pakistan.

The official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, added that more
detailed discussions of the issue would take place on Monday and Tuesday when
Lynn E. Davis, Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, met
with Beijing leaders.

Missile Pact Cited

Such transfers are barred by the Missile Technology Control Regime. China did
not sign the international accord. But last year, to avoid American trade
sanctions, Beijing promised to abide by its provisions.

Mr. Christopher and Mr. Qian are in Singapore attending a meeting of Asian
foreign ministers. At a dinner, Mr. Christopher spoke informally with Foreign
Minister Nguyen Manh Cam of Vietnam, the first meeting of American and
Vietnamese foreign ministers since the end of the Vietnam War. They are to hold
formal talks on Tuesday, at which Mr. Christopher is expected to press Vietnam
for more cooperation in accounting for Americans missing in the war.

The Secretary's meeting with the Chinese Foreign Minister, described by the
American official who briefed reporters as "businesslike and positive," was
dominated by discussions of smuggling of Chinese immigrants, trade and the
spread of weapons, to the exclusion of issues like Cambodia and reports that
North Korea is working to develop nuclear weapons. The official said the issue
of the transfer of missile parts to Pakistan took up "a good portion of the
meeting."

'Disturbing Evidence'

Some American intelligence reports have indicated that China has delivered parts
for M-11 missiles to Pakistan. The official said there was "some disturbing
evidence" that Beijing had violated the missile control agreement. If so, United
States law requires a ban on American companies' doing business with the Chinese
and Pakistani agencies involved in the sale.

Mr. Christopher "underlined the seriousness of the issue and the possible
implications and hoped the Chinese side could give some good explanations," the
official said

Beyond economic sanctions, the American official warned that failure to resolve
differences on "core issues" including the shipment of missile technology could
damage American-Chinese relations in general.

"He indicated that the United States was willing to engage more intensively with
China with respect to meetings and visits," the official said, referring to Mr.
Christopher. "But concrete progress had to be made."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

At Home Abroad;
Looking To the Pacific

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


Secretary of State Warren Christopher, interviewed while here for meetings with
Asian foreign ministers, spoke of "the primacy of Asia" in American foreign
policy: a primacy of opportunity.

Did that phrase, I asked, represent a change in America's view of the world?

"Yes," he said, "it's a change in American outlook. As a trading partner Asia is
one and one-half times as large as Europe. That's not to denigrate in any way
our European relationships. There's a primacy -- I wouldn't say in intrinsic
importance but in the opportunity for development of new economic and security
relationships."

The meetings here reflect the gradual growth of an Asia-Pacific network of
relationships and institutions. They center on Asean, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, made up of Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines,
Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei.

Asean, founded in 1967, for a time seemed a rather lifeless acronym. But its
annual meetings have become highly significant, with foreign ministers from many
other countries coming to talk after the formal Asean sessions. This year the
ministers of China, Russia and Vietnam have come, and Cambodia's is a special
guest.

A larger grouping, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, was formed in
1989. It meets in Seattle this November, and President Clinton has invited all
its heads of government there for an informal summit meeting: a symbol of his
emphasis on the importance of Asia.

Most of the governments in the region want the U.S. to maintain a strong
security role in the Pacific. But touring the area, one hears complaints that
America can be too rushed, too demanding on issues like human rights. Asians say
they see life as more complicated, more gradual.

Cambodia is a case in point. Asian friends of the United States were unhappy
when the U.S. seemingly threatened to withhold aid from the new government there
if it let the Khmer Rouge play any role. Mr. Christopher said that was a
misunderstanding; we accept that Cambodia must make its own decisions, though in
our view the Khmer Rouge should not take part unless it really gives up
violence. That clarification could be a response to Asian views.

If the Cambodian peace process continues to work, there will be just one major
immediate security problem in the East Asian region. That is the question of
North Korea's nuclear weapons development. But Mr. Christopher's meetings here
have touched on some tense political problems, notably in relations between the
United States and China.

The Chinese Government is unhappy with the Clinton Administration's decision to
extend its most-favored-nation trade status on condition that, within a year, it
shows significant progress on human rights. But Mr. Christopher said the reality
was that Congress would be watching closely to see that the condition was met.
Speaking not about China but generally, he said:

"I'm a great believer in raising the human rights issue when we talk with other
leaders. They may bat it back. But somewhere in their government someone will
read the memorandum of the conversation and find encouragement in the fact that
the issue was important to the United States."

The other tense matter that Mr. Christopher is trying, with difficulty, to work
out with China is Beijing's reported sale of M-11 missiles to Pakistan: a report
that, if true, would call for U.S. sanctions.

"I would emphasize how important our nonproliferation policy is," Mr.
Christopher said. "It is the arms-control issue of the post-cold war world."

(That leads to an apology. In a recent column I listed the Secretary of State as
among those who recommended against President Clinton's decision to extend the
moratorium on nuclear tests. I have since learned -- not from him -- that I was
misinformed. He not only supported that course; he urged it on the President.)

Warren Christopher does not give up easily when he tackles an issue. In 1980, as
Deputy Secretary, he negotiated with Iran for months to end the hostage crisis.

This trip will take him on to Australia. Then he will go to the Middle East to
try to get peace negotiations back on track. Was there a chance of success? I
asked. "The planets may get in the right order," he said. "That's what I told
myself during the hostage negotiations."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Herbicide Tied to 2 More Veterans' Ills

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


A report released today by the Institute of Medicine in Washington said there
was evidence to link Agent Orange and other herbicides with two health disorders
in addition to the three already under suspicion. But because of uncertainties
about whether troops serving in Vietnam received a large enough dose of
herbicide to cause such diseases, the committee said it was not possible to
quantify the likely risk to them.

Nonetheless, the Department of Veterans Affairs announced that it would add the
two further diseases to those for which veterans are already compensated.

Vietnam veterans receive compensation for three conditions already linked to
dioxin, a highly toxic contaminant of Agent Orange: soft-tissue sarcoma,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and a violent skin disease called chloracne.  The two
further illnesses cited by the institute's study are Hodgkin's disease and a
rare metabolic disorder called porphyria cutanea tarda that is characterized by
thinning and blistering skin.

The new report, which was sponsored by the veterans agency, was conducted by the
Institute of Medicine, a branch of the National Academy of Sciences. The
institute said its review of hundreds of studies indicated that the three
cancers and two skin conditions could be statistically associated with exposure
to Agent Orange and other herbicides that were used during the Vietnam War to
deny the enemy cover.

'May Cause Disease'

Dr. Harold Fallon, dean of the University of Alabama Medical School and chairman
of the 16-member study group that conducted the institute's study, told a news
briefing that such statistical associations did not prove that the chemicals
caused these disorders but indicated that a link was likely. But he said this
cause-effect relationship had been established in animal studies and "the
presumption here is that these agents in humans may cause disease."

Dr. Fallon said one bitter legacy of the Vietnam War had been decades of concern
about the health effects of spraying more than 19 million gallons of herbicides
over South Vietnam from 1962 to 1971. Since then, he said, some of the three
million Americans who served in or near Vietnam had come to suspect that
exposure to these chemicals caused them to develop cancer and other health
problems.

The veterans brought a lawsuit against seven chemical companies that had
manufactured the herbicides, the institute's report notes, but the case was
settled out of court in 1984 with the trial judge noting that "Proof has not
been produced in this court sufficient to go to the jury." Nonetheless the
companies paid $180 million into a fund that has since been used to compensate
veterans affected by Agent Orange or their survivors.

"This report will not end the controversy," said Dr. Fallon, "But we hope that
it will provide an agreed-upon base of information from which we can proceed to
answer the questions that remain."

Looking to Civilian Users

The committee said it based most of its conclusions about the health effects of
herbicide exposure on studies of civilian users of herbicides and factory
workers exposed to the chemicals. It noted that available evidence suggested
that "Vietnam veterans as a group had a substantially lower exposure" to
herbicides and dioxin than the subjects in most occupational studies, with the
exception of the pilots who sprayed the herbicide.

But the panel concluded that it might be possible to conduct new studies,
piecing together different types of information, to estimate how much herbicide
groups of soldiers were exposed to, a major missing component of most Agent
Orange studies.

These "historical reconstructions" of exposure could be drawn from information
on ground or perimeter spraying, herbicide shipment and storage at military
bases, and details about the missions of troops in certain areas, as well as
previously known information about aerial spraying and large-scale troop
movements, the study said.

The panel said an independent, non-Government organization should be
commissioned to develop and test new methods of evaluating the herbicide
exposure of Vietnam veterans. Such an independent body, which would help satisfy
concerns about impartiality and scientific credibility, could also conduct
follow-ups to previous studies of the airmen who handled and sprayed herbicides,
as well as studies of members of the Army Chemical Corps for possible adverse
health effects, it said.

Acceptance by Veterans

Several veterans groups praised the study and its call for further research as a
milestone in the long campaign by Vietnam veterans to be compensated for
maladies they attribute to exposure to Agent Orange. James L. Brazee Jr.,
president of Vietnam Veterans of America, called the report an honest one that
pointed out a relationship between herbicides and health problems.

"Finally, an unbiased scientific panel has looked at the evidence with open eyes
and has seen the obvious connections that no U.S. Government-based study has
been willing to see," Mr. Brazee said.

The Senate Veterans Affairs Committee held a hearing today shortly after the
report was released and its chairman, Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, pledged
to have its recommendations implemented. "This is a red letter day in the effort
to resolve the Agent Orange issue," said the West Virginia Democrat.

Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, a Vietnam veteran who as a member of the
House helped write Federal legislation on Agent Orange compensation and
research, said the report encouraged him for the first time to believe concerns
about the health effects of the chemical were being taken seriously.


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  A National Academy of Sciences study links herbicides like Agent
Orange with five diseases:

Soft tissue sarcoma -- A rare cancer that arises in tissues other than bone,
like muscle or internal connective tissue; can be in a variety of sites, with
widely differing outcomes.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma -- Cancer that forms from a type of cell in the lymph
nodes, bone marrow, spleen and liver; malignancies are usually widespread, and
about half of patients survive five years.

Hodgkin's disease -- Another lymphoma cancer, causing progressive anemia, weight
loss, itching and enlargement of lymph nodes, spleen and liver; responds well to
treatment, and patients have a high survival rate.

Chloracne -- A severe and widespread skin disease similar to teen-age acne, but
caused by chemicals; can involve skin cysts and rash; arises shortly after
exposure to the chemical and generally fades when exposure ceases.

Porphyria cutanea tarda -- A rare metabolic disorder that can involve thinning
and blistering of skin in areas exposed to sun, excess pigment in skin and
excess hair growth.

(Source: The Associated Press)
Chart: "Herbicides and Disease"

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

2d Hanoi Auto Plant

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 7; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 39 words

DATELINE: HANOI, July 28


A Vietnam car manufacturer, the Mekong Corporation, said today that it would
open its second plant in Hanoi in August because it believed demand would soar
after the United States dropped a trade embargo against its former enemy.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook: Not an Anchorman in Sight;
War Correspondents Remember Korea

BYLINE: By JAMES L. GREENFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


Last weekend, vaguely inspired to commemorate the Korean armistice signed 40
years ago this week, some 100 correspondents who had covered the Korean War
traveled to Washington D.C. to reminisce together.

War stories were out. Blue blazers were in. Most, it turned out, had retired
since the group's last reunion 10 years ago. That made this gathering feel more
like a country club weekend than a convention of old barracks mates. No one took
a formal poll, but former CBS correspondent Lou Cioffi, at a reported 67, was
considered the youngest. His white ponytail seemed to clinch the title.

Amid all the quiet talk, it was clear that most of the American correspondents
who had covered the war were the last of a breed and that American journalism
itself was at the end of an era.

American correspondents then were mostly white, male and chauvinist. So when
their ranks were punctured by a great reporter such as Marguerite Higgins for
the old New York Herald Tribune, they forgot all about being gentlemen of the
press. On the day Ms. Higgins won the Pulitzer Prize for her war coverage, the
sports columnist Jimmy Cannon, who was in Korea, tried to explain her
achievement to the male losers. "She's a novelty," he told his colleagues. "If
The Racing Form had sent Man o' War to cover World War II he might have won,
too."

For the most part, the correspondents in Korea were still awash in the patriotic
fervor of World War II. For the press in general it was a less questioning, less
cynical time. Few reporters, at least in the first years, ever dubbed it
"Truman's War." Fewer still expended any ink debating whether the U.S. should be
waging a war in Korea at all, though tactics were sometimes debated.

There was censorship, but few complaints as long as the censor's touch was
light. No one tried to keep you away from the action if you were hellbent to get
yourself killed. Unlike Desert Storm, where correspondents were tightly
confined, in Korea you could share a foxhole or go up the hill with a platoon.
The legendary Chesty Puller, then a Marine colonel, had a macho habit of
standing up during enemy artillery attacks and urged correspondents to display a
similar bravery. Few obliged.

Significantly, the weekend gathering could not boast a single face known to
millions. Since there was virtually no TV footage from the Korean War, there
were no anchormen at the reunion. Edward R. Murrow dropped in on the war
occasionally. But those were the days of his "Hear It Now" radio program; "See
It Now" came later. CBS radio reporters Robert Pierpoint and George Herman and
NBC's John Rich were about the closest anyone came to glamour. But as they
recalled last week, they spent most of their time trying to keep their huge
over-the-shoulder tape recorders running.

The still picture, not TV, defined the war for many Americans. The Associated
Press photographer Max Desfor, who organized the weekend, took a picture of
thousands of terrified Koreans inching their way along the twisted girders of a
bridge across North Korea's Taedong River just after it had been hit by U.S.
warplanes. He won the Pulitzer.

Life magazine covered the war with platoons of photographers. David Douglas
Duncan's pictures in Life of the Marine retreat from North Korea defined the
early days of the war for most Americans.

Twelve American journalists died in Korea. But for those at the reunion who had
gone on to cover Vietnam, Korea was a somewhat "safer" war for journalists. In
Korea there were trenches and a front line. And unlike Vietnam, the enemy was
out in front.

War coverage changed drastically after Korea. TV's wallop was just faster and
more powerful than either words or still pictures. And even though there was no
censorship in Vietnam, the quarrels between reporters and officials ran far
broader and deeper. A day after the reunion, CNN's Peter Arnett, who had won the
Pulitzer for his Vietnam coverage, listened patiently to a report of the weekend
and provided a terse, but fitting, sum-up of the Korean coverage. "That," he
reminded an aging war correspondent, "was a different war."

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE MIDWEST FLOODING;
Felons and Farmers Lock Arms in the Flood

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: HILLVIEW, Ill., July 27


This is a story of black and Hispanic drug dealers from Chicago who tried to
help 200 white farmers and factory workers save their town. They lost, but in
the fight against the river they found each other.

The town, under water since July 10, was Niota. The dealers, who belong to a
boot camp prison program in Greene County, have moved down the Mississippi
River, hurling sandbags in Quincy, Hardin, Marblehead and, this week, in
Hillview, on the Illinois River. But they still talk of Niota -- the people in
Niota, the food they ate in Niota, the songs they sang in Niota -- as if the
tiny town on the Iowa border were some lost utopia.

"When we first got there, I was telling my friends, 'Watch this -- how long
before someone calls us nigger?' " said Greg Yance, 23, who grew up in Chicago's
Cabrini Green housing project. "We was waiting, but it never happened. I felt
like I was in a movie. In the city it's, 'Look at John, he's trying to save his
house.' But here everyone was helping each other."

Today the inmates were choking up over a card that had arrived at the boot camp
barracks, in White Hall, Ill. There was a picture of roses, and a message: "With
warmest thanks to each of you, from your Niota family. You'll never be
forgotten."

Thirty people had signed the card -- a feat in itself, considering that most of
the residents had lost their homes and scattered -- including Neoma Farr, "your
orange drink lady."

"Neoma!" Mr. Yance said, smiling broadly as he read her name. "She used to make
orange drink for us every day. Everybody loved her."

Only the roof of Mrs. Farr's beauty salon is above water now. But she still has
her house. "They were crazy about that orange drink," she said today. "It was so
hot. We had to make sure they had plenty to drink. I couldn't get over how hard
they worked. And they thanked me for every itty bitty thing. I'd say, 'You're
very welcome.' "

'They Were More Upset'

Talking over the telephone, in a town choked by water, humidity and mosquitoes,
she began to cry. "I felt sorry for them," he said. "They worked so hard. The
last night some of the women made supper for them at the church, but they
wouldn't eat because they didn't save our town. As upset as we were, I think
they were even more upset."

Mr. Yance, who was 10 years old when his father was fatally shot at Cabrini
Green and who went on to join the Vice Lords gang, said he cried the day the
levee broke. "I'm still hurt," he said. "A lot of people lost their homes. They
were thanking us. We were confused. Thank you for what? It didn't help. Maybe we
should've worked harder, or faster."

The superintendent of the boot camp, John W. McCorkle, is a 6-foot 5-inch
Vietnam veteran who dresses in black, rarely takes off his sunglasses and shouts
at inmates when they forget to call him sir. It is all part of the four-month
paramilitary boot camp training, which the inmates, who have all been convicted
of nonviolent felonies, have chosen over prison. But the superintendent cried
openly over the levee.

"I told them, 'You're a man; you can cry anytime you want to,' " he said. "I
always knew boot camp kids work hard. But they amazed me. They were throwing
sandbags and smiling, and I asked them, 'What are you smiling for?' They
answered back: 'We're saving lives, sir!' "

He sent the first 50 boot camp inmates to Niota on July 2. The town was
desperate for help to fill sandbags and pile them along the levee. "We went
there with a purpose," said Dean Ramirez, 20, from Chicago's South Side. "We
were there to save the town."

First Look at the Mississippi

Most had never seen a levee before. Mr. Yance said that until boot camp he had
only made one trip outside of Chicago, to Springfield with his eighth-grade
class. He had never seen the Mississippi. "When I got close to it, you know what
I did?" he said. "I dipped my hands in it, and ran it over my face. I didn't
know when I'd ever get the chance to do that again."

The boot camp inmates threw sandbags from 8 A.M. until dark, for nine days
straight, stopping only to eat and to sleep at a nearby work camp. "They got our
respect when they showed us how hard they worked," said Mrs. Farr, who has three
sons, 22 to 28 years old. "They were so young. I just kept thinking, 'They
could've been mine.' "

And the inmates in turn began to think that the town could have been theirs. "At
first it was just work," Mr. Ramirez said. "But then I started caring. I said,
'Let's stack these right.' "

On the levee, inmates worked shoulder to shoulder with the men and women of
Niota.

"They brought us Pepsi," said Allen Church, who graduated from the boot camp on
July 14 and is living in a half-way house in Peoria because he does not want to
go back to Chicago. "They let us sit down in the shade and drink from their
water hose. They were just nice people. That's what made you want to do more.
When you saw the looks on their faces -- all they cared was that you were
there."

The townspeople were curious about the inmates. "They asked us, 'Where you from,
what you in for,' " Mr. Yance said.

'Things I Never Saw Before'

Mr. Yance, who is known as "Nature Boy" around the boot camp, had questions,
too. "I asked them about their farm animals," he said. "I seen about 45
different things I never saw before -- praying mantises; it actually got its
hands praying. Beaver as big as a dog, groundhogs, snakes."

Enclosed in the thank-you card from Niota was a snapshot of the fire station,
with water up to the windows. "That's the famous firehouse," Mr. Yance said.
"That's where we ate. They had great catfish. They fry it whole, without the
head."

Every day in Niota, it seems, was Thanksgiving. "They gave us roast beef, and
chicken dinners," said Maurice Redmond, 19.

"Meat loaf, apple pie, as much as you wanted," said Joe Moton, 28. "And they
thanked us every night."

In Praise of Niota

One of the songs they sang on the levee was co-written by Mr. Yance, who sang
bass a long time ago in the choir of the Old Zion Baptist Church in Chicago.
Some of the lyrics:

They say in Niota the eatin's mighty fine;

They feed me twice a day and now they're friends of mine.

Oh, Lord, we won't let you flood 'cause there is lots of love.

They say in Niota, the people's mighty fine;

Our skin's a different color, they don't pay it mind.

The levee broke at about 6 P.M. on July 10. "We started piling sandbags," Mr.
Yance said. "Water was coming. People just started crying, and running to the
hills."

Marching in Retreat

The inmates did not run. They did not leave until they were ordered to, and then
they marched away from the levee. Mr. McCorkle spoke with them afterward. "I
told them, 'Levees are going to break,' " he said. " 'You're going to work for
things that are not going to come through. No matter what the setbacks are, you
never give up -- like Niota.' "

The inmates said they learned that you cannot beat Mother Nature. "But I'd
rather fight Mother Nature than a bullet," said Mr. Church, who was shot in the
leg years ago. "If a bullet's got your name on it, you can't fight it. But if
you're fighting Mother Nature, you're working with other people."

The boot campers all say they want to go back to Niota. "That's the best thing I
ever did in my life," Mr. Yance said. "I want to talk to my parole officer about
going back to clean up."

He will be welcome. Niota held a flood meeting last week. "We had a choice
between having college students or the boot campers come back and help us clean
up," Mrs. Farr said. "Everyone wanted the boot campers."

Now, they are winning new respect, on the levee in Hillview. "If it weren't for
them, we'd be under water," said Jim Bowell, a ranch manager here. And today for
lunch the women made the inmates lasagna and homemade peach cobbler.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 30, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article and a picture caption yesterday about prisoners who helped
townspeople fight the flooding in Illinois misidentified the affected community
in some copies. It was Hillview; it is in the district of Hartwell.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Inmates participating in the four-month paramilitary boot camp
program helping residents of Hillview, Ill., by sandbagging the levee. (Keith
Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. D23)

Map of Illinois showing location of Niota. (pg.D23)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Breaking Ground for Vietnam Women's Memorial

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A model of a memorial to the 11,500 women who served in the
Vietnam War, for which ground was broken yesterday in Washington. Despite a $1
million shortfall in funds needed for the bronze statue of three nurses helping
a wounded soldier, organizers hope the memorial, nine years in the making, will
be in place by November. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At Home Abroad;
Fragments Of Hope

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS;  A. M. Rosenthal is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The United Nations is so beset by problems these days that one remarkable
success should be noted. That has been its effort to turn devastated Cambodia
from endless war to rational politics.

Untac, the U.N. Transitional Authority in Cambodia, began 17 months ago. It has
had 16,000 soldiers on the ground and 6,000 civilians. The cost is expected to
reach $2 billion: a large investment, but it may just have saved a country.

In May, Untac carried out a free election that brought 90 percent of eligible
Cambodians to the polls. Now a transitional government has taken hold. When the
Untac mandate runs out in mid-September, the prospect is that the elected
assembly will have written a new constitution and a permanent government will be
in place under the crucial figure of Prince Sihanouk as head of state.

It all remains fragile, but remarkable given how poor and riven Cambodia is. In
booming Asia, visiting here is like going back 40 or 50 years. In Phnom Penh, a
city of one million, there is no public transportation; "taxis" are motor
scooters or bicycle rickshaws.

"There was no infrastructure when we came," Lieut. Gen. John Sanderson, the
Australian who commands the Untac force, said: no telephone service, little
reliable electricity or clean water. Untac set up a satellite communications
system that covers the country. The bulldozers and trucks and ambulances one
sees are all marked Untac.

What happens when Untac leaves? I asked General Sanderson. Can the country run?

"It can't run without the support of the international community," he replied.
"Facilities were never great, and they've been subjected to three decades of
neglect and destruction."

Human destruction was of course the worst: the genocide that cost the lives of
perhaps one million while the Khmer Rouge was in power from 1975 to 1979. An
intellectual generation was wiped out: almost all the teachers, doctors and so
on.

The transitional Government is itself a phenomenon. It is composed of equal
numbers of two parties that bitterly fought each other in the election, and with
arms before: the royalists, who won a few more seats, and the party of the
former Communist Government supported by Vietnam.

There are co-Presidents: Prince Ranariddh and Hun Sen. This week they made a
joint visit to Laos, and next month they are planning to go together to the
other neighbors, Thailand and Vietnam.

How can it work? I asked the Foreign Minister, Prince Sirivudh. "Our priority is
to survive," he said. "That requires compromise. Both sides understand that if
they continue to fight, Cambodia will collapse."

The Minister of Information, Khieu Kanharith, who was in the former Government,
agreed. "We are tired of fighting," he said: "fed up."

But it is extremely fragile. The Government, for example, desperately needs
money to pay civil servants and soldiers, so they will have some attachment to
the system. That must come from foreign aid. Government ministers are paid only
$30 a month. Mr. Kanharith ekes out a living by translating English and French
books into Khmer.

But Untac has planted the seeds of a civil society. A human rights section, for
instance, has begun to train judges and lawyers. Untac set up a radio service
that gave the country its first unbiased news and helped convince Cambodians to
trust the election. Mr. Kanharith said he wanted the radio to continue,
independent of government dictation like the BBC. But that will require a
foreign angel to buy the broadcasting equipment for Cambodia.

There is hope of substantial help from abroad after Untac leaves. But there is
so much to be done: Health and education have hardly been touched. There are
still 500,000 mines in the ground that have to be removed.

With reconciliation working in the Government, private investors are showing
some interest. Banks and hotels are coming in, and six months ago the first
local beer appeared: Angkor.

But Cambodia's chance to develop depends in the end on the great unanswered
question: Can a way be found -- a political way -- to deal with the Khmer Rouge?


LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Saipan, 15 Years On, Correcting Labor Abuses

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


To the Editor:

I respond to "Saipan Sweatshops Are No American Dream" (front page, July 18) as
a citizen of the United States and a resident of Saipan, Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands.

Yes, many issues in the commonwealth need to be and are being addressed. Many
have to do with supporting an island economy that is rapidly changing from
primitive to progressive. I have been a part of workshops and planning groups on
economic and social reform.

We need outside labor, whether United States citizens or "alien" (including
Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders, Europeans, Filipinos, Chinese,
Taiwanese, Koreans, Southeast Asians and other Pacific islanders). Remember, the
commonwealth is only 15 years old!

Before obtaining independence in 1978, the indigenous Chamorro and Carolinian
people, going back to the 16th century, were governed by the Spanish, the
Germans, the Japanese and then the United States. Self-governance is a new
concept here, and many people from Asia and the United States have used this
opportunity to make fast profits and run.

Most outsiders come on one- or two-year contracts, to work at a specific job and
return home. Some from developing countries come hoping to move on to the United
States. They come here because they can make more money in a short time than at
home, and send the money back. As in other parts of the world, some workers are
exploited. Others are not.

I have seen a garment factory barracks with four people to an air-conditioned
room, each with an enclosed sleeping area. They eat in a cafeteria on the
grounds. Some garment factory owners take advantage of their workers, and some
run out of money. These problems are being addressed by the commonwealth
Department of Commerce and Labor.

I have lived near San Fernando, Calif., and saw the exploitation of the
Hispanic-Americans and African-Americans of nearby Pacoima. I lived in
California's Orange County when refugees began pouring in from Cambodia, Laos
and Vietnam. A woman who became a good friend of mine had been a physician in
Cambodia. Because she spoke several languages, but not English, she was forced
to work in a garment factory at far below minimum wages there.

I have visited the native American villages of Zuni, Isleta and others, and have
seen how they are kept dependent on the United States Government. I have visited
New York City's garment district and heard the stories of mob involvement. And I
have read about exploitation of mushroom growers in Pennsylvania, garment
workers in Appalachia, textile workers in the Southern United States. The new
owners of garment factories in Saipan have come from Georgia, looking for cheap
labor.

You talk about Chinese workers whose employer went out of business, leaving them
stranded. The surety company that bonded the company also went out of business.
The workers are staying in a former World War II bunker until a way is found for
them to return to China. These bunkers are also used by typhoon victims until
their houses are rebuilt. Food is provided by emergency rations from social
service agencies.

Because we live on a developing island in the western Pacific, we are often
without electric power or water. Our infrastructure is steadily improving and is
far ahead of most other Micronesian islands. Our social systems are far behind
many parts of the United States, but also improving. With a grant from the
Administration for Native Americans in Washington, a network of island social
services has been computerized and will provide better services for alien
workers and indigenous people.

During the first 15 years of the United States there was no Bill of Rights. The
first 10 amendments to the Constitution were passed in 1791. We have much work
to do, but I hope history will judge us by our accomplishments, and not by our
failures.

(Rev.) BARBARA GRACE RIPPLE
Pastor, Immanuel Methodist Church
Saipan, July 21, 1993

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 1, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ridgway Wanted to Keep U.S. Out of Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


To the Editor:

Matthew B. Ridgway, who died July 26 (front page, July 27), and George C.
Marshall were the outstanding soldier-statesmen of our day. General Ridgway,
after having distinguished himself as a combat commander in World War II, was
called upon to repair the disaster following Chinese intervention in Korea, and
he did so brilliantly.

Later, as Army Chief of Staff, he saved the United States from a second disaster
by almost single-handedly blocking the United States from intervening in Vietnam
after the French defeat at Dienbienphu.

In 1965, when the United States again considered intervening in Vietnam, the
White House made no effort to seek General Ridgway's advice. On the contrary,
the White House made it clear he was not welcome either at the Pentagon or in
Washington.

America's tragedy was that there was no one else in America's leadership who
understood so well the relationship between political goals and military force.

ROGER HILSMAN
New York, July 27, 1993

The writer was Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in the
Kennedy Administration.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 1, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

It's Alive;
How Clinton's Economic Strategy Ended Up Looking Like Bush's

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words


PRESIDENT CLINTON'S plan for reviving the economy, embodied in his budget
proposals, is squeaking through Congress. Even so, the President in one
important sense has lost the battle. Like a general forced to call off a cavalry
charge, he has given up his original strategy.

Instead, President Clinton is proclaiming the same hard-nosed economic
propositions that George Bush and Ronald Reagan proclaimed as their guiding
principle. The irony is that Mr. Clinton, like his Republican predecessors, has
locked himself into an economic theory that works in the imagination but perhaps
not in practice.

The theory, in its baldest terms, is this: A shrinking budget deficit means the
Government needs to borrow less. Less Government borrowing makes more money
available for the public to borrow from the limited pool of lendable funds. To
lure the borrowers, lenders lower interest rates. And as the newly lent money is
spent, the economy booms.

That sequence of events has never actually happened in America. Mr. Reagan and
Mr. Bush preached a smaller deficit and then added to it.  And when the deficit
did fall in the late 1980's, interest rates remained high. But in a nation
obsessed with shrinking the deficit, lowering interest rates through deficit
reduction has become the only acceptable economic policy. And Mr. Clinton has
become an adherent.

"It is surprising to see, when you step back, how broad the consensus is on this
key logic of economic policy," said John Lipsky, chief economist at Salomon
Brothers.

A competing thesis briefly challenged the logic of reviving the economy mainly
through deficit reduction and lower interest rates. During the election
campaign, President Clinton argued that the way to faster growth would be a shot
of Government spending, on public works, among other things. The new spending
would even raise the deficit, but once the economy was back on track, deficit
cutting would kick in.

Many prominent economists, among them several Nobel laureates, endorsed this
view. But they fell into silence by March, when Congress -- particularly
Congressional Republicans -- said no to the President's spending proposals.

Nowhere has deficit reduction been embraced more militantly than in the budget
debate. Virtually no one in either party any longer challenges the proposition
that deficit reduction will eventually be good for the economy, and now Congress
appears to be producing a bill that would make a substantial dent in the
deficit.

In the short run, however, the economy has been despairingly weak, expanding in
the second quarter at an annual rate of only 1.6 percent, the Commerce
Department reported last week.

During the Bush Administration, such reports drew scorn from Democrats. Now
Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairman of the President Clinton's Council of Economic
Advisers, says: "It takes time for the American economy to react to lower
rates." And Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich adds: "I would be surprised if 1994
brought a buoyant recovery; the payoff will come after next year."

Various explanations are offered for the grip that deficit reduction has on the
national imagination. Some surveys suggest that many Americans, suffering from
hard times, view Government spending as wasteful and unhelpful in improving
their lives. Ross Perot sounds this theme, and his solution -- slash spending,
and with it the deficit -- has been influential.

Then there have been the endless Presidential promises, not least from Mr.
Reagan, to cut the deficit, only to have it mushroom. "When you keep saying that
you are going to cut the deficit, and you never do, that gets a little like
Vietnam," said Christopher Jencks, a sociologist at Northwestern University.
"Once people in office get committed to cutting the deficit, and they fail, they
find that they can't back out of the struggle. They can no longer explain that
maybe the deficit might not be such a problem after all."

Whatever the dynamics, the current Clinton remedy is a set of tax increases and
spending cuts that would make the deficit progressively smaller than it
otherwise would have been. By 1998 the deficit would be $200 billion rather than
the $360 billion currently projected by the Congressional Budget Office. The
President's conflict with Congress is not over this goal, only over how to reach
it, with the President putting the emphasis on more taxes and the Republicans
preferring more spending cuts.

The version that emerged last week gave the President much less than he had
sought in energy taxes, but also less than Republicans had sought in Medicare
cuts.

Whatever the outcome, lower interest rates from deficit reduction -- even if
that formula works -- guarantee that the economy will regain its vigor only very
gradually. That raises the possibility that slow economic growth and high
unemployment are what many Americans might really prefer, without quite
admitting it, even to themselves.

Evidence of this preference is not hard to find. The President himself has gone
from his campaign promise of more jobs in a hurry to a more specific promise of
8.3 million new jobs in his first term. That sounds like a lot, but 8.3 million
breaks down to an average of fewer than 180,000 new jobs a month. Many labor
economists say at least 200,000 are needed to shrink the unemployment rate from
its current 7 percent level.

Then there is inflation. Wall Street executives, often speaking for customers,
argue that holding down inflation is more important than rapid job creation.
Rapid inflation, in this view, disrupts stock and bond markets, and the
disruption hurts the economy. The Federal Reserve pushes this case, arguing that
rapid economic growth puts too much money in people's pockets. They go on buying
sprees, shortages develop and prices rise.

"The ideal economic policy results in only moderate economic growth," said Henry
Kaufman, a Wall Street economist.

It takes great gobs of borrowing and spending to make the economy jump
vigorously enough to dispel the sense of hardship that prevails today. Low rates
alone can't make that happen. Various studies have shown that people are
reluctant to borrow and spend if they lack the income to repay the debt.
Similarly, corporate executives frequently say that low rates are only one
factor in their decision making. An appliance company, for example, won't invest
$10 million to expand a factory and hire 100 workers if its executives lack
confidence that there will be customers for all the extra stoves and
refrigerators.

This year the weak economy and the promise of future deficit reduction have made
rates fall even while the deficit remains high. And the low rates have helped
the economy. Car and truck sales have risen in response to lower rates for
vehicle loans, and so have sales of machinery and equipment to companies. "Only
housing has not come around yet, which is a bit puzzling, given falling mortgage
rates," said Alan Blinder, a member of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers. "But we expect it to come around soon, and that will make the economy
rise."

Still, Administration officials say they are not relying entirely on lower rates
through deficit reduction -- recognizing, as everyone does, that the immediate
result of less Government spending will be to dampen growth.  Already, officials
are talking about softening that blow -- perhaps by delaying some of the deficit
reductions that were adopted in the first place to rescue the economy.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Deficit Medicine: No Cure, Just Relief" shows projected
deficit without cuts, the Senate budget proposal and the House budget proposal.
(Source: House Budget Committee); "Driving Eith the Brakes On" shows annual
figures for economic indicators from 1977 t9 1993. (Source: Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Commerce Department)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 1, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHAT IS IT ABOUT AUGUST?

BYLINE: By Bruce Handy;  Bruce Handy is a writer for "Saturday Night Live" and a
former editor of Spy.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2323 words


The common wisdom: nothing happens in August. It's the Sunday of months -- lazy,
dull, ineluctably spoiled by anticipation of September's Monday. Plus, it's too
hot. Worse, it's the title of an unreadable novel by Judith Rossner.

Journalists know August as "the silly season," the uneventful time of year when
newspapers are especially desperate for copy and so rely -- more so than usual
-- on fluff. No surprise, then, that the Aug. 24, 1939, edition of this
newspaper devoted an entire page to the previous day's goings-on at the World's
Fair then filling Flushing Meadows. Readers were apprised that a sneezing
contest had taken place at the Carrier Corporation's "Igloo of Tomorrow" -- part
of a special event that also included a demonstration of the "hay fever hop" by
a group of Arthur Murray dancers. Elsewhere in that day's Times was a six-inch
report about an unusually large sea turtle that had escaped from the Fulton Fish
Market, attracting crowds as it swam to freedom in the East River. "Half a dozen
Chinese," the paper reported, "were heard to sigh audibly." The story went on
for three more paragraphs. In short, a slow news day.

Unfortunately, if Aug. 23, 1939, was a big day for impolite contests and
determined terrapins, it was also a big day for Nazis: in Moscow, the German
Foreign Minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, stunned the world by flying to Moscow
to sign a nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union, which paved the way for
Germany's invasion of Poland, World War II and the deaths of millions. Not such
a slow news day.

And there you have the August paradox: a month when robust, substantive news --
"MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour" news! -- is assumed to be in short supply, a month
when front pages are traditionally given over to lunch-break photos of female
office workers hiking their skirts to beat the heat, August is all too
frequently rocked by global crisis. Year after year we expect Kenny G. Year
after year we get Axl Rose.

True, for the fortunate among us, August's special irritations are largely
limited to humidity, tick scares and whimsical New Yorker covers involving sand
castles. For journalists and world leaders, however, the month has historically
presented more vexing challenges. "What is it about August?" demanded an
exasperated George Bush after his second consecutive summer vacation was
disrupted by global crisis -- the first instance being the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait in 1990, the second the 1991 Soviet coup. This bears examination. Not
only is "What is it about August?" one of the former President's rare
diagramable sentences, it might easily have been uttered by any number of his
predecessors: by Woodrow Wilson as World War I gathered speed in August 1914; by
John F. Kennedy when East Germany began construction of the Berlin Wall in
August 1961; by Warren G. Harding when he unexpectedly died in office in August
1923.

August is batting a thousand in the 1990's. Following the 1990 invasion of
Kuwait and the 1991 Soviet coup, August last year visited South Florida and
Louisiana with the ravages of Hurricane Andrew, the most expensive natural
disaster in the history of the United States. (Intriguingly, the most expensive
natural disaster in the history of the Roman Empire also occurred in August,
when Mount Vesuvius erupted and buried Pompeii in 79 A.D.)

And there's more:

On Aug. 6, 1945, the first atomic bomb -- or "cosmic bomb," as it was christened
by the War Department in an odd, proto-new ageism -- fell on Hiroshima. Three
days later, the second fell on Nagasaki.

In August 1959, Chinese troops crossed into northeastern India during a
now-forgotten border dispute. (Obscure, yes, but it still counts.)

An American destroyer was attacked by three North Vietnamese torpedo boats in
the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964, provoking the UnitedStates Congress to pass
the resolution that would provide the legal justification for our involvement in
the Vietnam War, as well as a rationale for Oliver Stone's career.

The Watts riots occurred in August 1965.

In August 1968, the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia. This was the same month
that saw violence and flag desecration at the Democratic National Convention in
Chicago.

On Aug. 8, 1974, Richard Nixon resigned the Presidency, ushering in what
historians now refer to as "the turbulent Mayaguez years."

Benigno Aquino was assassinated moments after returning to the Philippines on
Aug. 21, 1983.

Of course, not everything that happens in August is the stuff of dinnertime
conversation at Zbigniew Brzezinski's. The month has also been a time of
revolution in popular culture. Indeed, a disquieting if uniquely American art
form got its start in August 1922 when a New York station, WEAF, broadcast the
first commercial in radio history. (It was for the Queensboro Realty Company of
Jackson Heights, Queens, and lasted a full 10 minutes.) Another uniquely
American art form -- the fetishization of celebrity death -- found its two
greatest subjects in the August passings of Marilyn Monroe and Elvis Presley.
The Beatles' last concert tour ended in August 1966, and a cherished tradition
of even longer stature was lost on Aug. 8, 1988, when the first night game at
Wrigley Field in Chicago was played. But August's most pernicious legacy is the
ongoing traumatization of American children that began on Aug. 13, 1942, with
the Radio City Music Hall premiere of what many 4-year-olds consider the single
most frightening film ever made: "Bambi."

WHEN FLESHING OUT CAMPAIGN biographies or responding to queries from Scholastic
magazine, politicians invariably note that their hobbies include reading
history. But half-thumbed copies of David McCullough's "Truman" notwithstanding,
this plainly isn't so. Because if our leaders really were students of history,
why would they continue to insist on vacationing in August?

Ronald Reagan, to be fair, insisted on vacationing most every month, so he
doesn't merit discussion here. George Bush, on the other hand, brought to the
White House a lifelong habit of spending much of August at his summer home in
Kennebunkport, Me.; during the invasion of Kuwait, he stubbornly continued to
race around in his cigarette boat, and was roundly criticized. Thus, during the
next August's Soviet coup, he made a point of flying back to Washington and
manifesting Presidential-ish concern. "I'm going to spend a little more time --
maybe quite a bit more time -- in various formal ways that you will see unveiled
in staying on top of this situation," he sort of explained. Fortunately, the
coup was overturned with quick dispatch, freeing the President for guilt-free
golf with Arnold Palmer. Of course, the whole contretemps had been timed to
coincide with Mikhail Gorbachev's own August vacation. It's easy to imagine the
former Soviet President slapping his forehead and muttering to himself, as
gun-toting apparatchiks placed him under house arrest, No, you don't visit your
Crimean dacha during the height of coup season. Stupid, stupid, stupid!

The current White House appears to take August with as much seriousness as it
took the middle-class tax cut. Reports the deputy press secretary, Arthur Jones:
"I don't think the President has given much attention to the idea that there's
been some [ominous] coincidence in August. His intention is to vacation." Where
the President will do that is, at this writing, undecided. "It's going to be
someplace where, obviously, he can relax and play golf," says Jones, "and where
Chelsea will be entertained and enjoy it as well." Club Med, he confirms, has
been ruled out. But no matter where the President goes, Jones insists, "He is
going to be prepared to deal with such matters [as inexplicable August
bedevilments]." In fact, Clinton demonstrated his abilities in this regard just
last month, when he resolutely cut short a Hawaiian vacation (by 12 hours) in
order to see and be seen at the Mississippi flood plain.

Journalists are no luckier with their times off than are world leaders. Indeed,
their lore is full of tales of reporters forced to abandon remote fishing holes
by the inconsiderate actions of foreign potentates. Serge Schmemann, the Times's
Moscow bureau chief, had a trip to Canada cut short by the Soviet coup, which
also forced the NBC anchorman Tom Brokaw to cancel a planned break. Dan Rather
had fishing expeditions aborted in 1990 and again last year by Hurricane Andrew.
Tempting fate, Rather is planning yet another vacation this August. Though he
now has Connie Chung to spell him, he jokes that he will nevertheless be
"especially nervous" while away from his desk. "Beware the sign of Leo," he
intones, as if he were saying, "Courage."

HISTORIANS OFFER NO explanations for the August paradox -- at least the one this
reporter contacted didn't. "I haven't any deep thoughts about it offhand,"
Arthur Schlesinger Jr. confessed, despite having lived through 75 Augusts -- and
having written a book entitled "The Cycles of American History" to boot. Perhaps
a 20th-century scholar can't make out what would have been all too clear to any
leading thinker of the Dark Ages: August must be cursed.

Or maybe one or more of these equally well-considered theories will make sense:

So many bad things happen in August because August is too hot and most of the
good summer movies have already been released. It's a statistically proven fact
that tempers flare in hot weather -- according to F.B.I. figures, August and
July invariably lead the year in incidents of violent crime -- and the only
refuge for many is "Weekend at Bernie's II." Perhaps the heat and bad movies got
to Saddam Hussein in much the same way they get to civilian larcenists and
aggravated assaulters.

Hot or not, the weather in August is better for invasion-launching and
coup-hatching than is the weather in, say, January or February. Touted by Dan
Rather, among others, this, too, is a sound explanation, though it betrays a
cultural bias running through this article, applying as it does only to the
Northern Hemisphere.

So many bad things happen in August because people's guards are down. Gorbachev
learned this lesson. The cunning troublemaker will strike when the target is
preoccupied with deterring weekend house guests.

So many bad things happen in August because shrinks are away on vacation. This
well-known exodus may account for a certain added tetchiness in the aisles of
Fairway, the Upper West Side fruit-and-vegetable bazaar, but is less reliable as
an explanation for "acting out" by world leaders, most of whom are not in
analysis, according to James Chace, the editor of World Policy Journal and a
professor at Bard College. He adds: "I can't think of anything worse for a world
leader than being in analysis. You either lead or don't lead. But if you start
thinking about it. . . ."

August is an unfortunate month astrologically. Michael Lutin, who writes an
astrology column for Vanity Fair, contends that as the sun moves into Leo each
year, people generally become more assertive -- a dangerous tendency in a
species not known for selflessness. This influence is said to be doubly
explosive when combined with, say, a "Uranus-Neptune conjunction," like the one
we have been laboring under since Saddam invaded Kuwait. The tragic events
leading to World War II can be similarly blamed on a "Saturn-Pluto square."

So many bad things happen in August because that's the way the little men who
live deep below the earth's crust and control our thoughts like it. Overheard on
a sidewalk near the corner of West 103d Street and Broadway, this theory is
offered in the spirit of inclusiveness.
So many bad things happen in August because so many bad things happen every
month. Claiming that a noteworthy amount of them occur in August is like
claiming that a noteworthy amount of minutes occur in the third quarter of a
football game. As it happens, a survey of the randomly chosen months of April
and November, which was intended to "prove" August's paramount position with
regard to convulsive news events, instead led to the discovery that other months
enjoy equally impressive catalogues of debacle. Aprils past have seen America's
entry into World War I, the death of Franklin Roosevelt, the Bay of Pigs
expedition, the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and last year's riots in
Los Angeles, among many other mishaps. November can boast of Russia's October
Revolution (November by our calendar), the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the
beginning of the Iranian hostage crisis and the revelation of the Iran-contra
affair. And April and November only have 30 days.

Oh well, you've read this far.

ARE WE NOW heading into a fourth consecutive August of bloodshed, turmoil and
unhappy anchormen? James Chace's best guess for a potential August catastrophe
is a new Serbo-Croatian war. Joan Quigley, the San Francisco woman who cast
astrological charts for the Ronald Reagans, predicts an especially disastrous
August sometime before the end of the century -- although, Hil- lary Rodham
Clinton-like, she declines to reveal any specifics just yet. That would be "a
little dangerous," she avers. One frightening certainty: this August, the Mets
will be playing 15 home games.

One can only hope that President Clinton's vacation won't be as troubled as were
his predecessor's. "Please, please understand," President Bush begged as he
tried to brush away reporters who were dogging his golf game the day after the
Soviet coup collapsed, "we've been through an awful lot here" -- no doubt the
most heartfelt statement of his Administration.

Oh, and by the way: scientists at the International Astronomical Union last year
issued a warning that there is a "small but nonnegligible chance" that a newly
discovered comet might collide with the earth in the 22d century -- not in
April, not in November, but in August 2126. The 14th, to be precise.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
An Innate Universal Moral Sense? If So, Why?

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 979 words



The Moral Sense
By James Q. Wilson
313 pages. The Free Press/Macmillan. $22.95.

Superficially considered, James Q. Wilson in his new book, "The Moral Sense,"
sounds like an old-fashioned father banging on the tabletop and shouting for a
rejection of new-fangled ideas and a return to the ways of our ancestors. It's
these modern-age thinkers like Darwin, Marx and Freud who have got us in such
trouble, he says. It's the cultural relativists and logical positivists. Who
says there's no longer such a thing as virtue? he demands to know. Why, we
wouldn't always be complaining about crime and immorality if we didn't know what
virtue was. Our very concern over the decline of ethics proves that our moral
standards are still very much intact.

But in attempting to analyze and prove these assertions, Mr. Wilson is more
subtle and reasonable. He taught government for 26 years at Harvard and is now
James Collins Professor of Management at the University of California at Los
Angeles. He has written or co-written 12 books, among them "American
Government," "Bureaucracy," "On Character," "Thinking About Crime" and, with
Richard J. Herrnstein, "Crime and Human Nature." So he is practiced at thinking
about complex problems systematically, and incidentally stirring up a storm.

Do humans have an innate moral sense? Confounding the cultural relativism of
anthropologists, he posits a universal pattern of kinship that holds children
dear and forbids murder and incest. Even the Ik of northern Uganda turn out to
conform, writes Mr. Wilson in a footnote. According to a 1985 study by Bernd
Heine, Colin Turnbull in "The Mountain People" simply misunderstood this
famously loveless tribe.

As Mr. Wilson sees it, four innate sentiments dispose people to a universal
moral sense. These are sympathy, fairness, self-control and duty. He doubts if
the human species could have evolved without them. (He can talk about evolution
because his earlier condemnation of Darwin only referred to "the popular
corruptions" of his teachings.)


Of course he can't flat out prove the innate existence of these four sentiments.
But his far-ranging discussion of them embraces a remarkable variety of
experimental research. "The truth, if it exists," he writes, "is in the
details."For instance, the famous case of Kitty Genovese, in which 38 witnesses
ignored the cries of a woman being killed, would seem to have cast doubt on the
innateness of sympathy. But extensive experimenting seems to have determined
that the Kitty Genovese effect works proportionally to the number of potential
helpers involved. A single bystander caught off guard by an emergency is more
likely to intercede than a crowd, each of whose members assumes that someone
else will step in.

After examining his four innate sentiments by every imaginable light from the
behavior of torture victims in Vietnam to the responses of subjects in an
experiment in which wallets containing money and addresses were dropped on New
York City streets, Mr. Wilson moves on to "an account of the sources of the
moral sentiments." These sources he sees as human nature, family experiences,
gender and culture.

The sections on human nature and family are more or less what one would expect.
But in his section on gender he concludes that moral sense differs by sex, with
males more interested in justice (honoring contracts, making a fair division or
respecting rights) and females more disposed to care (helping people in need,
resolving conflict). Anticipating objections, he writes in a footnote: "I am
acutely aware of the risks I run in writing of gender differences. On no topic
is it easier to produce misunderstandings or arouse resentments. To some, any
talk of differences implies a claim about rights. It does not. People can be
equal without being the same."

In his section on culture, he attempts through a complex examination of
geography, economics, feudalism, church history, travel and commerce to answer
the following question: "How did it happen that in the West people were induced
to believe that our moral sentiments should extend to many, perhaps all, people,
and not just to family, close relatives and ethnic kin?"


In the latter part of this discussion, he deplores what he calls "the ambiguous
legacy of the Enlightenment," in particular those intellectuals who assumed that
"one could take the product of a strong family life -- gentlemanly conduct --
for granted and get on with the task of liberating individuals from stuffy
convention, myopic religion and political error."

Here Mr. Wilson seems to be turning himself back into the heavy father pounding
the tabletop and decrying the decline of morals. But by this point we can see
beyond the cliche and realize that his remarks on the day-care debate, on the
pitfalls of single-mother families and on the ideology of the free choice of
values are not just the knee jerks of a reactionary.

At the end he sums up: "I am struck in reading accounts of the lives of some of
the most dedicated ideologues by how little the content of the ideology mattered
and how much anger at 'society,' 'the ruling classes,' 'the government,'
'meddling bureaucrats' or 'inferior races' mattered. Anger is the necessary
handmaiden of sympathy and fairness, and we are wrong to try to make everyone
sweet and reasonable. But anger, like those moral senses that it exists to
defend, must be checked by other senses. Those others are self-control and duty.
By the same token, self-satisfaction and narrow loyalties, which are emotions
growing out of self-control and duty, must be checked by other sentiments, and
these are sympathy and fairness."

This striking analysis of the excessive rage in American society today is worth
thinking about. As is so much else that Mr. Wilson writes about in this
provocative meditation on the moral sense.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Q. Wilson (The Free Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Hotel Venture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 2


The official Vietnam News Agency announced a joint venture today between the
Hanoi Electronic Corporation and the Daewoo Corporation of South Korea to build
a $64 million hotel to help meet an expected surge in tourism. Vietnam expects
one million foreign visitors annually by 1995 and three million a year by the
turn of the century, the agency said. About 440,000 foreigners visited Vietnam
last year. In addition to the 300-room hotel, the joint venture company also
plans a $50 million business center. Over all, the Government is seeking about
$300 million in foreign capital to build about 7,000 more hotel rooms, the
agency said.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

China Bans One of Its Own Films; Cannes Festival Gave It Top Prize

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Aug. 3


In a bleak omen for the Chinese cultural world, the Government has banned one of
the nation's most acclaimed films after just a few showings.

The leaders had approved a censored version of "Farewell to My Concubine," a
movie that follows the lives of two Peking Opera actors through five turbulent
decades of recent Chinese history. But last week the authorities abruptly halted
its release and distribution without offering an explanation.

The ban will not affect the movie's planned release in the United States in the
fall. But it means that Chinese audiences will be unable to see the first
Chinese film to win the top prize at the Cannes International Film Festival.

From the Politburo's point of view, the problem is that "Farewell to My
Concubine" deals with homosexuality and depicts some of the turmoil in the
Communist period.

Worst of all, a leading character commits suicide. That might be tolerable if
the death occurred during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, when most
of today's leaders were out of power. Instead, it takes place in 1977, when Deng
Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders were already clawing their way back to the
top.

Normally the Chinese authorities ban a film in obscurity and almost no one hears
about it. But to their huge embarrassment, a quiet execution is impossible this
time.

The Praise and Prizes

In May, "Farewell to My Concubine" was a co-winner of the Palme d'Or, the top
prize at the Cannes International Film Festival. The other film was "The Piano,"
a romance set in New Zealand.

"Farewell to My Concubine" also received the International Critics' Prize for
"its incisive analysis of the political and cultural history of China and for
its brilliant combination of the spectacular and the intimate."

Critics have given the movie some excellent reviews. Vincent Canby described it
in The New York Times as "a handsome, exotic, beautifully acted film, full of
the kind of humanism that festival juries like to commend."

The ban is a retreat in what has overall been a process of cultural
liberalization in China. Books, magazines, music and art have all been
flourishing and mostly finding ways to evade the cultural commissars.

The Propaganda Department, which is adjusting to the times by changing the
translation of its name to Information Department, is loosening controls over
news organizations and is even allowing a wave of talk-radio programs. Satellite
dishes and cable systems are sprouting around the country, allowing millions of
citizens to watch Hong Kong and Taiwan films and serials.

Speaking of the ban, Chen Kaige, the director of the film, said today, "When
this kind of thing happens in my country, I feel very hurt." He said his
intention in the film had not been to pass political judgment on the Government,
and he noted that films like "The Godfather" and "Platoon" were not regarded as
anti-American even though they depicted violence by organized crime and the
trauma of the Vietnam War.

Officials from the Chinese Film Bureau and the Ministry of Radio, Film and
Television declined to comment today. The Chinese distributor, the Beijing Film
Studio, also refused to say anything. By some accounts, the Politburo itself
screened the film and decided to ban it unless major changes were made.

"Farewell to My Concubine" opened in Shanghai on July 26, and two weeks' worth
of tickets promptly sold out, reportedly setting a record in the city. The
authorities have allowed the film to continue its run there for all the
performances whose tickets have been sold, apparently for fear of angering
audiences who had paid nearly $4, half a week's salary for a typical worker, for
each ticket.

In Beijing, the Government allowed a premiere on Wednesday last week but no
other showings. The film has not been allowed in any other cities.

The ban already is having a chilling effect on other productions. Mr. Chen, the
director, said he had put aside plans to film "Life and Death in Shanghai." The
book, by Nien Cheng, describes the sufferings of one family during the Cultural
Revolution.

Mr. Chen said that for now at least, he had also dropped the idea of making a
movie of the early life of Jiang Qing, the actress who became Mao Zedong's wife.
Both projects would be far more sensitive than "Farewell to My Concubine," which
is not directly political.

Harvey and Bob Weinstein, the co-chairman of Miramax Films, which is to release
"Farewell to My Concubine" in the United States, expressed outrage at the ban.

"We have been through this sad situation before and were hopeful that the
blatant suppression of artistic freedom in China had changed since then," the
Weinsteins said in a statement. "Obviously that is not the case."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The film "Farewell to My Concubine," which follows the lives of
two Peking Opera actors through five decades of Chinese history, has been banned
by the authorities in Beijing despite winning the top prize at the Cannes Film
Festival. Zhang Fengyi and Leslie Cheung appear in a scene from the movie. (Ho
Slug)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE BUDGET STRUGGLE: News Analysis -- Beyond the Superlatives;
Clinton-Dole Jousting Over Budget Bill Shows How Assertions Can Mask Truth

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


On television Tuesday night, President Clinton called the budget legislation now
before Congress "the largest deficit reduction in history."

Not to be outdone, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, went on
the air a few minutes later to say that the measure was actually "the largest
tax increase in world history."

Between the two of them, more claims and counterclaims were made Tuesday night
than were staked out in the Oklahoma land rush, and some of them were just as
suspect.

This is an attempt to sort some of them out.

When the dollars are adjusted for inflation, this year's budget bill is neither
the biggest deficit reduction measure nor the biggest tax increase in recent
years.

Over five years, in 1993 dollars, the bill would lower the annual deficits by a
total of $496 billion. Of that, $241 billion would come from tax increases.

The budget agreement that Democrats in Congress developed and George Bush signed
in 1990 contained $482 billion in deficit reduction -- higher taxes and lower
spending. Adjusted for inflation, that plan, some of which is still in effect,
was worth $532 billion in 1993 dollars.

As for taxes, the 1982 law enacted under Ronald Reagan raised taxes by $215
billion over five years, which amounts to $286 billion in 1993 dollars,
considerably more than this year's figure.

Senator Dole was simply wrong when he said, "Never before in American history
has the Government increased tax rates retroactively."

The Treasury put out a list today of 13 such rate increases since 1917, the most
notable of which was Lyndon B. Johnson's surtax, imposed in 1968, to help pay
for the Vietnam War. The law was passed on Oct. 22, and the tax was retroactive
to Jan. 1 for corporations and April 1 for individuals.

Retroactivity Is Common

A law enacted in October 1976 raised the minimum tax rate for those who claim
many tax deductions and other breaks to 15 percent from 10 percent effective the
previous Jan. 1. The constitutionality of this retroactive rate increase was
upheld by the Supreme Court.

In fact, it is commonplace for changes in the tax law to be retroactive, and
this year's budget bill contains 14 retroactive tax breaks, according to the
Senate Finance Committee staff.

Mr. Clinton's statement, repeated twice, that there would be no income tax
increase on working families earning less than $180,000 is not precisely
correct.

Income taxes for couples would be raised on taxable income of over $140,000.
Taxable income is what is left after deductions and personal exemptions are
subtracted from adjusted gross income. As a rule of thumb, a couple with a
taxable income of $140,000 probably has a total income of about $180,000. But
some surely have an income below that, accountants say.

On 'Working Families'

Moreover, it was only the careful use of the words "working families" that made
Mr. Clinton's assertion even remotely correct.

More than five million retirees with annual incomes as low as $34,000 (counting
half their Social Security benefits) would see their income taxes increase
because they would be taxed on up to 85 percent of their Social Security
payments, from 50 percent.

And even the term "working families" does not cover the thousands of cases in
which one spouse works and the other is retired or disabled and receives Social
Security benefits.

Still, Mr. Clinton was accurate, according to most official and private
estimates, when he asserted that 80 percent of the higher taxes would be paid by
taxpayers with incomes above $200,000 and 90 percent by those with incomes above
$100,000.

On Deficit and Debt

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Dole agree that the national debt, the accumulation of all
annual deficits over the years, would grow by $1 trillion in the next five years
even if the Clinton plan becomes law. If the plan does not become law, it would
grow by $1.5 trillion.

Mr. Clinton's statement that with his plan in place, the economy would create
eight million new jobs over the next four years is in line with the forecasts of
most public and private economists. They also say that roughly this many jobs
would be created without the plan. The fact is that in the short term, tax
increases and spending cuts are not conducive to job creation.

Before the plan was announced, the Congressional Budget Office projected about
nine million new jobs over the next four years. Senator Dole seized on the
budget office's January forecast and contended that the Clinton plan would
actually cost more than a million jobs. But budget office officials say that is
a misinterpretation of the data.

Mr. Clinton is relying on the average of three private forecasts that were made
more recently than the budget office projections.

What Businesses Want

Mr. Dole's statement that 800,000 small businesses would owe higher taxes was
probably true, but it lacked perspective. The business owners who would see
their taxes increase represent less than 4 percent of the 21 million taxpayers
who report business income. Many more small businesses would see their taxes cut
than would see them raised under the legislation.

But Mr. Clinton's assertion that many small business organizations, including
the National Association of the Self Employed and the National Venture Capital
Association, were backing his plan also needed perspective.

Most business groups, including the National Federation of Independent
Businessmen, the largest association of small businesses, oppose the
legislation.

And when Mr. Dole said that 80 percent of the spending reductions in the bill
would come after the 1996 election, he was making a good point but exaggerating
the numbers.

Most of the spending cuts in the five-year plan would indeed come in the fiscal
year 1997, which begins Oct. 1, 1996, or in the fiscal year 1998. But the
proportion of spending cuts is 61 percent in the last two years if lower
interest payments are counted as a spending reduction and 53 percent if they are
not, Senate Budget Committee calculations show.

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Dole agree that if the plan is enacted, deficits will
skyrocket after the 1997 fiscal year. They just put the point differently.

Mr. Dole presented it to argue that the Clinton plan would be ineffective. Mr.
Clinton used it to show how important it was to bring medical costs under
control in a new national health program.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Deficit Analysis" shows benefits of the new budget, as
projected by the Senate Budget Committee, and total debt increase over five
years. (pg. A18)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE BUDGET STRUGGLE: White House Memo;
An Excess of the Pulpit And Not Enough Bully?

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


Staring defeat in the face, Richard III melodramatically offered to trade his
kingdom for a horse. In an equally tight spot this week, President Clinton has
talked himself to the brink of laryngitis, but his wheeling and his dealing have
been strikingly subdued.

Without the vote of Senator Dennis DeConcini of Arizona, a conservative Democrat
who finally agreed late this afternoon to support him, Mr. Clinton seemed likely
to be beaten when his budget proposals come before the Senate on Friday. Some
incentives had been offered to Mr. DeConcini, including a less onerous tax on
high-income recipients of Social Security, designed to appeal to the many
wealthy retirees in Phoenix and Tucson, and an executive order pledging new tax
revenues to deficit reduction rather than new spending.

But when Mr. DeConcini went to the White House this morning to watch the signing
of the order, did the President bear down in hopes he could seal the deal and
parade the Senator before the television cameras? He did not. Asked whether he
remained undecided, Mr. DeConcini said that indeed he did.

What, someone wanted to know, was Mr. Clinton going to do to move him? The
President seemed nonplussed and finally answered, "Good government." Aides said
later that he had not been sure what the Arizonan planned to do until just
before Mr. DeConcini made his announcement.

Reluctant to Get Tough

It was a strangely disjointed episode in the thoroughly perplexing story of Bill
Clinton's quest for a program he and many others have long thought he needed to
survive.

Many in Washington, including some undecided lawmakers, have been deeply puzzled
by the President's seeming reluctance to get tough with the Democrats who have
made the passage of this centerpiece of his Administration such an arduous
undertaking. Several House members said the President had never told them,
crisply and unambiguously, that he had to have their votes.

Mr. Clinton is not playing hardball, politicians and lobbyists say, partly
because of an ingrained reluctance to crack down, partly because the political
realities on Capitol Hill have changed and partly because he has so many tough
fights ahead that he does not want to expend all his ammunition at once.

"I have been criticized in some quarters for not talking tough enough," Mr.
Clinton acknowledged this morning in a speech to the Urban League. "My theory is
that if you do the tough things, actions speak louder than words."

George Stephanopoulos, one of Mr. Clinton's top advisers, argues that his boss
is getting a bum rap. "There is a difference in your approach 14 days out, 7
days out and 2 days out," Mr. Stephanopoulos said. "You don't want to start
shouting too early. But I can promise you this: In this final 48 hours, nobody
will leave the Oval Office or get off the phone with the President without
feeling that they have been asked for their vote."

But among some who have worked on Congressional relations in other
Administrations, many of them now lobbyists, there is disdain for Mr. Clinton's
performance, even though he will probably prevail.

Several weeks ago, a senior member of the White House staff was told by an
old-timer, "Sooner or later, the President's going to have to tell one of these
senators that like it or not, he's going to support the Administration, he's
going to get nothing for it, and if he doesn't he'll pay for it, period."

The Clinton staffer answered, "But these guys don't know that game."

'The Boom Is Broken'

Tom C. Korologos, a White House mainstay under Presidents Richard M. Nixon and
Gerald R. Ford, was somewhat more generous. One reason that Mr. Clinton has not
lowered the boom on wayward Democrats, he said, "is that the boom is broken."

It is true that many of the techniques used by past Presidents are no longer
available. Some were always dicey. In 1970, President Nixon successfully
encouraged Republican voters in New York to back James L. Buckley, a
Conservative, over Senator Charles Goodell, a Republican foe of the Vietnam War.

But Franklin D. Roosevelt, one of the most popular Presidents, failed in his
attempt to purge five Democratic senators and one Representative. All but one
were renominated easily.

"Nowadays, the most successful Senate candidates are elected by going against
the grain, picturing themselves as standing up for their state or region against
the evil knights of Washington," said one of Mr. Clinton's strategists. "If a
President is too ham-handed, you only help the guy you're trying to hurt. And
believe me, they don't care whether or not you campaign for them or help them
raise money, which was one of F.D.R.'s main levers."

A Lot of Machines

Anne Wexler, who worked in the Carter White House, says any modern President is
dealing not with Democratic and Republican blocs in the Senate but with "100
separate political machines." Ms. Wexler, now a lobbyist, gives Mr. Clinton
credit for "a good political ear" and suggests that with a heavy and complicated
political agenda, he has to be careful not to get into a trading posture, where
lawmakers can say, "I'll vote for the budget if you'll give me a pass on health
care."

In fact, the Clinton Administration tried to make an example of Senator Richard
C. Shelby of Alabama, a Democrat who defected early in the battle over the
economic package. A small office of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration was moved out of his state, and he was limited to a single ticket
when the national champion University of Alabama football team came to the White
House for a reception.

It didn't work, partly because members of the President's staff bragged about
their maneuvers. Mr. Shelby was looked upon as a hero at home, and he is one of
six Democrats who are expected to vote "no."

Presidents once disciplined mavericks, or tried to, by regulating the flow of
dams, highways, airports and post offices. Far fewer of those sorts of things
are available to the needy chief executive today.

The Subtle Touches

Still, as Mr. Korologos said, there are subtle things a President can do.

"You get a guy from the West who's causing you trouble, you have the Interior
Department spread the word, quietly, that he can't get things done in
Washington," Mr. Korologos suggested. "You get a guy from Florida, let it be
known that the Corps of Engineers can't work with him. Summertime, cut the
allocation of tour passes for the White House. Keep him off Air Force One. Don't
return his calls. Cut his wife from the First Lady's social list."

And there are some new techniques. The Reagan Administration compared computer
lists of its own contributors with lists of those who had given to balky
legislators. When it found a match, it asked the donor to put the pressure on
the legislator but not to mention the White House. It often worked wonders.

But Mr. Clinton has held back. In the case of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the
New Jerseyan who is another of the six Democrats expected to oppose the
President, no attempt was made to twist arms or to enlist Gov. Jim Florio to
change the Senator's mind. Some White House strategists thought that doing so
would only risk losing Mr. Lautenberg's seat when he runs for re-election next
year and paring the Democrats' narrow Senate majority.

Even in the best of times, relations between Presidents and Congresses are
fiendishly difficult to manage.

With a lifetime of experience on Capitol Hill, Lyndon B. Johnson usually knew
just what blend of sugar and vinegar would work. But not always. Once, when
Southerners were giving him trouble on the 1964 civil rights bill, he invited
Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia to the White House. After a few suitably
flattering remarks, he put his arm around the Senator's shoulder.

"Bob McNamara says we have to close that Norfolk naval base of yours," he said,
according to a onetime Johnson aide, "and I don't much want to."

Mr. Byrd got the message. But he still voted no.

Jimmy Carter, like Mr. Clinton a newcomer to Washington, failed to provide good
seats at his inauguration for the guests of Representative Thomas P. O'Neill,
the powerful Speaker of the House, and Mr. O'Neill never forgave him. Mr.
Clinton and his team have made no gaffes on that scale.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton arriving yesterday at the Capitol to meet with
Democrats about the budget plan. At left was a secret service agent. (Michael
Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Remains and U.S. Jet Parts in North of Laos

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 255 words

DATELINE: BAN XOM, Laos, Aug. 5


Human remains and the wreckage of crashed aircraft have been found in northern
Laos by an American military search team looking for servicemen lost in the
Indochina war.

The Americans are investigating 32 crashes around the Plain of Jars, a remote
highland region that was a major theater of the war from 1964 to 1973.

In July, with the help of dozens of Laotian laborers, the Americans began
excavating a site on the crest of a hill near the village of Ban Xom, 75 miles
north of the capital, Vientiane. Laotian officials said on Wednesday that the
searchers had discovered bone fragments among what remained of the aircraft
wreckage.

American officers have refused discuss details of what had been found. But Capt.
On Chanh of the Laotian Army, who is working with the Americans, said the
wreckage was of an F-4 Phantom fighter-bomber. The site is a few miles northeast
of Muang Phonsavan, the provincial capital, and is reached by a 30-minute uphill
hike from National Route 7, a main road to northern Vietnam.

Vice Foreign Minister Soubanh Sarithirath inspected the site at Ban Xom on
Monday along with Lieut. Col. John Kendall of the United States. Mr. Soubanh
Sarithirath was shown an area where the human remains were found and pieces of
wreckage. These included part of the sole of a combat boot, harness buckles and
other parts of the pilot's cockpit equipment.

The Laotian Government says that it has no knowledge of living missing Americans
but that the United States is welcome to pursue its search.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 6, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D; Page 15; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


Sometimes it's hard to sort out the product messages, price slashing and rebate
offers related to hit movies and their videocassettes.

For example, in "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York," which was released on tape
last week by Fox, there is a pause in the action at the Plaza Hotel while young
Kevin (Macaulay Culkin) announces the hotel's "800" reservations number. It
would have taken him several deep breaths to rattle off all the other companies
and deals on items from shoelaces to air fares that are tied to the film in
promotions.

"On 'Home Alone 2,' we had about 35 licensing agreements for 80 to 100
products," said Al Ovadia, president of licensing and merchandising at 20th
Century Fox. Mr. Ovadia searches scripts for ways to put products like the Plaza
into movies. Another task is to invent and license new products to go with the
movies.

"We take 'Home Alone 2' and create derivative products: games, apparel, things
of that sort," he said.

Fittingly perhaps, the "Home Alone 2" tape is offered on the Home Shopping
Network.

"Films like this give us opportunities to build little businesses around the
licensing," said Jim Adams, the vice president for purchasing for the network.
"We can bring on a celebrity and build a two- or three-hour show around the
concept."

The channel sells other kinds of tapes, but it stopped selling movies several
years ago when it couldn't match prices offered by mass merchants.

Now, Mr. Adams said, movie cassettes and licensed products have more potential
than ever. In the case of "Home Alone 2," though, the channel is easing back
into the movie field by selling the cassette but not the products. Mr. Adams
said the network would sell such items with future cassettes.

As for pricing the tape, which Fox released at $24.98, the channel anticipated
immediate cuts by discount chains and set its own price at $14.95, which is as
low as most mass merchants or lower.

Two other categories of promotion are the rebate and sponsorships.

The "Home Alone 2" box contains a brochure offering discounted American Airlines
tickets and Aviva Sports equipment. It also describes a $5 rebate offer on the
tape. By buying boxes of Quaker Oats cereal the customer qualifies for the
rebate.

The brochure, of course, encourages people to buy more than a videocassette. But
Robert DeLellis, the president of Fox's video division, said that such tie-ins
with sponsors also give "Home Alone 2" wider exposure and help put it on racks
in grocery stores and other outlets.

"It's obvious who you go to for sponsorships," Mr. DeLellis said. "Go look in
the film."

American Airlines is featured in both "Home Alone" movies. One item advertised
in the video brochure is the Talkboy cassette player Kevin used in the movie to
disguise his voice. Mr. Ovadia said the player was especially made for the film
by Tiger Electronics, which later got Fox's permission to sell it in stores.

Now, that 800 number again. . . .

NEW VIDEO RELEASES
Sommersby
1993. Warner. $94.99. Laser disk, $34.98. 114 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.
 In an Americanized "Return of Martin Guerre," a Confederate veteran named Jack
Sommersby (Richard Gere) emerges from a Yankee prison camp to rejoin his wife
(Jodie Foster) and reclaim his Tennessee farm. But is it Sommersby? War changes
a man, but this person's boot size is two sizes smaller and his dog growls at
him. To her growing puzzlement, Laurel Sommersby notices gaps in her husband's
memory. Also, the prewar Jack was a bully while this Jack is concerned with
things like workers' rights. With its social and economic concerns, Jon Amiel's
film seems better suited to the post-Vietnam era and plot machinations only
create confusion. But Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times, "Sommersby" is
"never boring, largely because of Ms. Foster's beautifully self-possessed
presence."

Bad Lieutenant
1992. LIVE. $92.98. Laser disk, $34.95. Closed captioned. R rated: 91 minutes;
NC-17: 96 minutes.
 With his signature relish for the down and dirty, the director Abel Ferrara
burrows into New York's seamy side through the misadventures of a corrupt
detective (Harvey Keitel). Corrupt is perhaps too mild a term for the
lieutenant, a junkie who caroms around town setting up drug deals and
intimidating women. But while the detective has an eye for well-built female
corpses, he also has some saving graces. So does Mr. Ferrara, whose brand of
super-sleaze works in a film that "would seem outrageously, unforgivably lurid
if it were not also somehow perfectly sincere" (Janet Maslin).

Ethan Frome
1993. Touchstone. $94.95. 99 minutes. Closed captioned. PG.
 John Madden's film faithfully recreates the framework of Edith Wharton's story
about a Massachusetts farmer (Liam Neeson) who, burdened by a mean-spirited wife
(Joan Allen) and a harsh existence, falls in love with an orphaned cousin
(Patricia Arquette). Like the book, the story is told in flashbacks, but on
screen a preacher (Tate Donovan) is introduced to participate in the story and
to narrate what Wharton handled with much more grace and precision on the page.
"In the place of a nearly perfect novella is a sad and solemn little film that
never has a life of its own" (Canby).

Swing Kids
1993. Hollywood. $94.95. 110 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.
 On the heels of "Newsies," another recent Disney film about the exploited
young, comes a story of teen-age rebellion in Nazi Germany. Again the vehicle is
a musical, but rather than striking newsboys demonstrating in the streets, the
upstarts have long hair and defy the Brown Shirts by staging big-band dance
productions. Eventually, though, the characters, and especially the adults who
enter the story, turn the film bloodless, and, "mired in familiar-feeling
moments, it flounders" (Maslin).

FROM THE PAST

The Movies People Missed
Crowd the Best-Renter Lists

Best-renter lists are always crowded with movies people missed or passed up in
theaters. Here are some current examples.

FOREVER YOUNG. With movie-star panache, Mel Gibson carries a mishmash of a film
about a freeze-dried World War II pilot who thaws out 50 years later. 1992.
Warner. $94.99. Laser disk, $34.98. 102 minutes. Closed captioned. PG.

MATINEE. A roving B-movie mogul (John Goodman) goes to Key West to hawk his
latest flick and cheer up folks during the Cuban missile crisis. 1993.
MCA/Universal. $92.95. Laser disk, $34.98. 99 minutes. Closed captioned. PG.

THE CEMETERY CLUB. Three widows (Ellen Burstyn, Olympia Dukakis and Diane Ladd)
pick up the pieces after the deaths of their husbands. 1992. Touchstone. $94.95.
Laser disk, $39.99. 107 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

LEAP OF FAITH. Jonas Nightengale (Steve Martin) is a big-top preacher with lots
of flash, no compunctions and surprising second thoughts. 1992. Paramount.
$92.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 110 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

JENNIFER 8. A detective (Andy Garcia) chasing a serial killer scours garbage
dumps and encounters a blind woman (Uma Thurman). 1992. Paramount. $92.95. Laser
disk, $39.95. 127 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

CONSENTING ADULTS. In Alan J. Pakula's film a staid couple (Kevin Kline and Mary
Elizabeth Mastrantonio) get some adventurous next-door neighbors (Kevin Spacey
and Rebecca Miller). 1992. Hollywood. $94.95. 99 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

SCHOOL TIES. At prep school everybody loves the star quarterback (Brendan
Fraser) until they discover he's Jewish. 1992. Paramount. $95.25. Laser disk,
$34.95. 110 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

USED PEOPLE. A widow (Shirley MacLaine) is advised by family and friends. 1992.
Fox. $94.98. 116 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Films like "Home Alone 2," starring Macaulay Culkin, above,
stimulate promotions and the licensing of products associated with the film.
(Andy Schwartz); "Sommersby," starring Jodie Foster and Richard Gere, is a new
video release from Warner.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 7, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE BUDGET STRUGGLE;
A Walk Offstage, Holding Fate of Budget

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


With the capital waiting to learn whether Senator Bob Kerrey would sink or save
President Clinton's budget plan, what did the inscrutable Nebraska Democrat do?

Did he repair to the Library of Congress to study precedents? Did he call his
pollster for a last-minute reading?

Not on Thursday afternoon. Instead, he wandered out of the Senate chamber alone
and spent a good part of the afternoon in a dark theater watching "What's Love
Got to Do With It?" -- a movie about the singer Tina Turner.

It was not until after 8:30 tonight, in a speech on the Senate floor, that Mr.
Kerrey, addressing the President, let it be known that he had decided to vote
for Mr. Clinton's budget. "I could not and should not cast the vote that brings
down your Presidency," he said.

Mr. Kerrey, known to some as "Cosmic Bob," has never been a conventional
politician, and that is what bothered White House officials the most as they
tried to gain his support for the budget. While they could win over other
senators with promises of pork, it was never clear what it would take to get Mr.
Kerrey on their side.

In fact, it was never clear precisely why Mr. Kerrey, who is expected to coast
to re-election next year no matter how he voted, took so long. Was he seeking
revenge on the man who beat him to the White House in a sometimes bitter primary
campaign and then denied him the Vice Presidency? Was he relishing all the
attention? Or, as Mr. Kerrey himself insisted, was he simply unable to make up
his mind?

'Having a Difficult Time'

When he arrived on the Senate floor tonight, it was with a burst of
understatement. "I've taken too long, I'm afraid, to reach this decision," he
said. "My head, I confess, aches with all the thinking. But my heart aches with
the conclusion -- that I will vote yes for a bill which challenges America too
little -- because I do not trust what my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle will do if I say no."

Mr. Kerrey then launched into what appeared to be an indictment both of his
colleagues and the White House, urging Mr. Clinton to get off "the low road of
the too-easy compromise or the too-early collapse."

His comments capped an extraordinary day in which no one could say which way Mr.
Kerrey was going to go.

Speaking to reporters hours before he made up his mind, Mr. Kerrey framed the
decision in cosmic terms.  "There is no moral consensus," he said. "And as a
result, we're having a difficult time deciding what to do."

But with all of his colleagues' minds made up, the truth is that only Mr. Kerrey
was having quite so monumentally difficult a time deciding.

So with only his vote separating victory from defeat, the White House staged a
frantic campaign to convince Mr. Kerrey that, yes, a moral consensus could still
be achieved. It started with a 90-minute meeting with Mr. Clinton this morning
in the White House living quarters.

Officials were so solicitous that they moved Mr. Kerrey's car in a downpour so
he would not have to face a pack of reporters waiting for him outside. Dee Dee
Myers, the White House press secretary, joked that a room in the White House
might be renamed in Mr. Kerrey's honor if he voted right.

Moods swung as people tried to handicap what Mr. Kerrey would do. One Senate
official said, "It's safe to say that the White House was seized with fright"
that Mr. Kerrey might vote against the budget.

But by this afternoon, Susan Brophy, the deputy White House Congressional
liaison, was not biting her nails. "I know everybody is looking at this process
with horror, but I think most people are being straight shooters with this
thing," she said. "If Bob Kerrey were trying to hurt this Administration, he
would have announced three days ago that he was voting against this bill. That
would have totally tipped the cards off the table."

'I Teetered on the Edge'

Yet after his announcement, Mr. Kerrey insisted to reporters tonight that his
agonizing was no act. "I teetered on the edge all day long," he said.

The 49-year-old Mr. Kerrey, who lost a leg while serving in Vietnam, harshly
criticized Mr. Clinton as a draft dodger during last year's primary campaign.
But people close to the Senator maintain that any animosity is now gone.

"A lot of the younger campaign staff veterans who work at the White House now
probably think that this is Kerrey's revenge," said Billy Shore, a close adviser
to Mr. Kerrey. "But I actually think his relationship with Clinton has been
terrific. The campaign is way into history for him."

In an interview some weeks ago, Mr. Kerrey spoke almost fondly of Mr. Clinton.
Asked to assess him as a leader, he replied: "He's not confused. He's not
bewildered. He's got a set of things he wants to get done. And I don't see in my
field of view a man who's in personal turmoil."

Almost the opposite could be said of Mr. Kerrey, at least today, as he engaged
in very public soul searching. In conversations Thursday and today with Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the Senate Finance
Committee, Mr. Kerrey spoke not of minute provisions in the package but about
bigger issues, like the United States's role in the world.

Such hesitancy is no surprise to those who have watched Mr. Kerrey. He mulled
over the issue for days before deciding to oppose the use of force in the
Persian Gulf.

It was barely two months ago that Mr. Kerrey agonized in much the same way
before voting on the Senate's version of Mr. Clinton's budget. But in recent
days he began to change his tune, saying he had hoped the House-Senate
conference committee would make more spending cuts.

That Mr. Kerrey should focus on cutting costs is not surprising. He comes from a
conservative state, and he has always emphasized governmental economy.

But Mr. Kerrey was also branded as aimless, even flaky, during the Presidential
campaign. He sometimes seemed detached, as if he were on a mission to save the
country but unable to articulate exactly where he was going.

'Fascinating and Interesting'

"He listens to his own drummer," said Bob Shrum, a political consultant who has
advised Mr. Kerrey. "This is someone who doesn't fit the normal political
categories. And that's what makes him fascinating and interesting and also makes
him difficult at times for other people to deal with."

So all some people could do today was make light of the predicament as they sat
on the sidelines and waited. And waited.

Asked if he had seen Mr. Kerrey on the Senate floor, Senator Trent Lott, a
Mississippi Republican, replied: "Oh, Kerrey, I saw him float over the chamber.
He's communing."

But even the often solemn Mr. Kerrey found some humor in the situation. After
his tete-a-tete with the President, he said he felt like Robin Ventura, the
Chicago White Sox baseball player who was in a brawl this week with Nolan Ryan,
the Texas Rangers' pitcher.

"I'm Ventura," Mr. Kerrey quipped. "He's Nolan Ryan."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey speaking to reporters after he cast the swing
vote for the budget last night. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)(pg. 7)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hurricane of the Mind

BYLINE: By Catherine S. Manegold;  Catherine S. Manegold is a reporter for The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5262 words


Summer storms in South Dade County sweep the flat, green horizon nearly every
afternoon. Even on clear days, claps of thunder sometimes trouble the still air,
causing newcomers to look skyward with a start as they reach, instinctively, to
close their windows. Cloudbursts, when they do come, hardly cool the already
steaming land or break the torpor. Instead, they leave their mark in gray
puddles or shimmering mists that rise from scorched fields made of coral rock
crushed to dust and pebbles by years of the hoe and the plow blade and the
ravages of wind and rain.

When the wide open fields of the Redlands are fresh-plowed, the coral rock lies
in chunks out in the open. A farmer digging his toe into the earth shifts
chalklike pebbles to and fro. Pure white under a pure white sun, they burn the
eyes. Summer days, when the mercury rises above 90, and sea salt and humidity
mix to leave a film upon bare skin, the air itself can seem to almost sting.

The fourth Sunday of August last year was such a day. The sky was blue around
the edges but white up near the sun. The bush beans in the field across from Tom
and Pat Faris's house had been plowed under. Sprawling and perfectly flat, the
field's pebbled expanse stretched east, from 157th Avenue in the Redlands where
they live out toward U.S. 1, where tourists seeking a little off-season ocean
time and more permanent refugees from Arkansas, Oklahoma and the industrial
states of Illinois, Michigan and Indiana were moving north in heavy traffic.
Almost every car on the road that day was going north, up from the Keys in a
hurried-up evacuation ordered by Dade County officials who were nervously
watching the approach of a storm called Hurricane Andrew.

At the Farises' place, the exodus was out of sight. They couldn't see U.S. 1
back then for all the trees. And they were busy anyway. With the storm coming,
they had to batten down their house and tend to the 200 or so macaws, Amazons,
lovebirds and cockatoos that Pat had on the place that day. Fretting about the
storm warnings and figuring that Pat Faris's house was inland and away from the
worst risk, people who usually used Pat's bird boarding services during holidays
and family emergencies figured this was an emergency and arrived in a steady
stream with their brilliantly plumed friends. Then they went off to face their
own problems. Sunday afternoon and evening the Farises lugged almost 60 bird
cages inside, filled them up and prayed for luck. That night, with the house
squared away, they settled the birds down to ride out whatever came -- safe,
they hoped, inside the family's nearly 100-year-old farmhouse.

Built in 1909 just as Henry Morrison Flagler was pushing his railroad empire
south toward the Keys, the Farises' two-story Florida pine home was a pioneer's
house, a survivor of the worst storms in the state's recorded history and made
more sturdy still by Tom's endless hammering and renovation. The couple had
found the place after looking weekends and vacations for two years. In 1981 they
moved in and, board by board, rebuilt every room but two. The kitchen still had
work to be done and other odds and ends remained, but the house was mostly
finished, a polished piece of Florida history stuck back from the road and
almost hidden from view by a tangle of trees and bushes that, season by season,
delivered funky little crops of limes, bananas, lemons, mango, avocado and
papaya.

It was the land that first drew the Farises there. The house, when they bought
it, was such a dilapidated wreck, Pat remembers, that one day when she sat down
on the toilet she fell straight through the floor. "I worked on that house for
10 years, trying to get it back to how it used to be in 1909," Tom says.
"Everything was handwork, tongue in groove." By dawn, on Aug. 24 last year, the
place was wrecked. Coral rock pebbles from the fresh-plowed field across the
road had lifted up by the bucketful, by the acre, and crashed against the pine
boards. The windows broke, the doors gave way, the wind came inside. That was
it. The birds were safe. The Farises made it, too. So did Pat's best friend,
Mary Falconer, who was visiting from Pat's home state of Texas and rode out the
worst of Andrew alone, caught in another room.

The storm slapped the house face-on. Hour by hour, as it intensified, the birds
grew quieter, the wind, wilder. A rare hawkhead parrot Pat was keeping for an
aviary on nearby Fisher Island died a day or two later from the shock. By the
time the winds subsided it looked as if an army had sprayed Gatling gun bullets
at the building all night long. "We said it was like that scene from 'The
Godfather,' " Tom says. "The one where they spray that tollbooth full of
bullets." Pat said the yard looked like snow that morning. White pebbles were
everywhere.

The house was crooked and leaning. Sometime in October it was bulldozed and
pushed out across the road in an undistinguished heap. The swimming pool
survived but it quickly became black with muck and algae, a breeding ground for
mosquitoes and disease. The trees were either dead, gone or broken. The land was
suddenly clear. That was Hurricane Andrew. Making nothing out of something.

EVERY HOUSE, every field, every acre, every resident of south Dade County is a
story of that hurricane. No square foot in the 20-mile-wide swath of destruction
torn by those winds escaped harm. Now, one year later, only plowed fields look
pretty much as they once did. Everything else was transformed in ways too
profound to patch or cure. Houses that took little damage lost all their trees.
Other houses ripped apart like stacks of cards. Thirteen people died that night.
As many as 72 others lost their lives afterward, mostly to accidents and
overexertion. More than 250,000 were left homeless.

The land was so altered in the four hours it took the hurricane to scream in
from Biscayne Bay and out again toward the Gulf of Mexico that for months
afterward some longtime residents got lost in their own neighborhoods.

From the start, most people said they would rebuild. But that, as everyone soon
found out, was really a misconception. The task for most has been re-creation,
not renovation, making something out of nothing, something different than
before. Estimates of the total cost range from $20 billion to $30 billion. But
that does not count the human heart.

For the Federal Government, Hurricane Andrew's more than $10 billion tab in
grants and loans was the largest recovery bill in history, worse, so far, than
the bill for this summer's Midwest flooding. Those who lived beside the swollen
Mississippi and fled the Midwest's oozing waters returned home to muck-filled
basements, ruined furniture and rusted appliances. But most of their houses
stood. In south Dade County whole neighborhoods were blown to sodden scrap.
Businesses were razed, shopping centers leveled. It felt biblical, a disaster
without end, perpetuated by mankind's peccadilloes.

For most of Andrew's victims, every step toward reconstruction meant a dive into
arcane and shifting building codes. Blueprints drawn up one month could
sometimes be obsolete the next. Some efforts, like the rapid restoration of
electricity in the most-battered areas, won praise. Others struck a deep vein of
discontent. But the most hated Federal project is a $40 million "jitney service"
used mostly, its critics say, by joy-riding students and thieves on the run.
"For that money, every citizen affected by the storm could have gotten a new
Toyota," shrugs one official in Homestead, which lay in the hurricane's eye.

To anyone driving the short trek south on U.S. 1 from Miami, the lingering
devastation becomes apparent well north of the hardest-hit areas. Scientists
plot the worst of the storm across an east-west band bordered by Southwest 88th
Street to the north in the trim Miami suburb of Kendall, down in a straight line
south to Florida City, an ever-struggling agricultural backwater hoping to draw
its fame and fortune from the millions of cars, vans, trucks and buses that pour
off the Florida Turnpike every year on their way to the Keys, the Everglades and
the ocean.

The first signs are subtle. Along Old Dixie Highway, U.S. 1, palm trees stand on
four legs, not one. Their trunks are true. But buttressed on three sides by
clunky 2-by-4's, they look like poles held up by braces, unnatural. Other trees
look even stranger, standing at their normal height but still without a trace of
foliage. The most famous palm, though, has taken the shape of a cross. Thirty or
so feet up its wrinkled white trunk, a 2-by-4 rests dead center, crosswise,
having pierced it like an arrow through an apple.

A color photograph of that tree is the only pinup in the Kendall office of
Kathleen Cavanaugh Hale -- better known to Floridians as Kate Hale, the
eternally wired director of the Dade County Office of Emergency Management who
yelled "Where's the cavalry?" in total frustration in the first chaotic days of
the cleanup. For her, the tree is proof not only of what happened, but also of
what could easily recur.

Presiding over a county operation that is always on the edge of an alert, its
control room boasting 52 phones (one red -- connected to the Turkey Point
nuclear power plant) and its rumor control room fitted with 16 more, Kate Hale
still spends every day somehow plugged into last year's storm. "Everyone is
aware of what the game is," she says sharply into the telephone to another
county official.  "But it's just one of about 42 million problems, you know."
Day after day, she prepares for the next disaster while the detritus of the last
one has yet to be picked up.

The damage becomes more apparent the farther south one goes. An Infiniti
dealership does business with a lot full of brand-new cars beside a showroom
that is gutted, still open to the wind. A Honda dealership just up the road is
jammed with new cars too. But its roof last month was only a wide expanse of tar
paper stacked with white tiles that looked like checkers waiting for a game.
That sight, common still, gives every hurricane expert in South Florida pause.
With hurricane season up again and running until November, every one of those
unattached tiles could quickly become part of a storm, not part of the
rebuilding. And that threat exists, block by block and sometimes house by house,
the length of the affected area.

"The problem right now," says Robert C. Sheets, the director of the National
Hurricane Center, located in Coral Gables, just north of the worst damage, "is
that while we rebuild we are weak." Sheets's work since 1965 has been to monitor
hurricanes throughout the hemisphere. He tracks them whether they peter out at
sea, slam into Mexico as one did last month or career into his own backyard. "My
tiles on the roof, hopefully will be attached shortly," he says wryly. "But if
we get hit soon again, we have all this loose construction material all over the
county. Even a tropical storm now could give us big problems."

Farther south, just outside Homestead, where the winds shrieked at speeds of at
least 145 miles per hour, with maverick gusts that may have reached 212, entire
houses crumpled, exploded or imploded and whole fields of fruit trees rose into
the air then settled, upended, like tumbleweed across the road. One building
stands just as it did that Monday morning, a twisted iron wreck. Now, though, it
sports a banner of defiance. "Andrew's Gone. We Haven't." Smaller print tells
customers where to find the new location.

Mile after mile of U.S. 1 is still like that, littered with signs that tug at
the imagination. Telephone and utility poles are covered with clues of
reconstruction, hand-stenciled signs for drywall, demolition, topsoil, storm
shutters, permits, pressure cleaning, auto glass, hauling, dumping, check
cashing, post hole digging, mini blinds to fit, sapling trees, tile work and the
promise: "We buy homes for cash." Most give beeper numbers. Everyone is on the
move. Yet for all their cumulative effect, it is easy to grow accustomed to
those sights, as if south Dade County were just a backwater given to disrepair,
a dying Old South without the kudzu vine.

It is easy, after the first shock, not to see such signs at all or simply to
incorporate them into new notepads of rural geography. Piles of debris that
should have been long gone are now incorporated into wheres and
how-to-get-theres. "Come on down Krome Avenue, take a right on the next hard
paved road, which is Southwest 256th Street -- but the sign is down -- then
you'll start to see a lot of garbage, junk and stuff piled up by the road and
that means you're almost here," are the directions given by William Schaefer,
the vice president of sales and marketing at J. R. Brooks & Son, a fruit
packaging company, as he guides a visitor to an evening meeting of avocado
growers. Even now, shattered houses picked up by a contractor or demolition team
are dumped haphazardly -- and free -- out in other folks' front yards. It saves
the contractors from $27 to $59 a ton in dumping fees. And it is a constant
annoyance.

The drama over trash dumping is nowhere near an end. Signs along U.S. 1 tell
citizens to dial *-A-L-E-R-T to report anyone sneaking around at night to dump
illegally. "It is kind of hard to explain how much trash we've had to deal
with," says Michael J. Tavano, Homestead's director of public works. "I've
figured it as a football field piled about 36 stories high." That is just for
the town of Homestead. The larger, 20-mile-wide area affected by the storm
generated about 12 million cubic yards of debris; one football field piled 432
stories high, by Mike Tavano's reckoning.

TOM AND PAT FARIS lived on their front porch for two weeks after the storm,
scrounging water and ice wherever they could, linking into a phone line draped
overhead and skimming electricity from a noisy generator. Then they moved into a
trailer. It meant collapsing their lives from a 3,500-square-foot creaky,
historic old place to a steel, fiberglass and plastic tube 33 feet long, 10 feet
across, with barely room enough to light a cigarette. "Thirty-three by two, in
case you want to know," Pat says. That is the emotional width.

Any question about that trailer prompts Tom and Pat to respond at once, as if
they have fused verbally around this issue. "We hate it," they say in unison
when asked about that trailer. "We want it off here," Tom says. "Off the
property. I don't want to ever see this thing again."

Pat, who apologizes for the clutter and her own scant, beat-the-heat clothing
while Tom reaches for a 16-ounce Budweiser, rattles off the specifics of the
place they plan to build. Her mind has become a compendium of loss and planning.
Two hundred trees on the property, gone, mostly. Only 21 left standing. "There
was nothing green afterwards," says Tom, relaxing after a day spent in the
relative order of Fort Lauderdale, where he works as a fleet supervisor for
Tarmac Florida, a concrete company that on July 8 gave him a Bulova watch to
mark his 25th anniversary. "Brown. You'd look around and you'd see brown."

Pat has been planning the new house for 10 months. She plans with a mixture of
suspense and apprehension: "One day this friend of mine kept telling me that
everything will be O.K. That I'll have a big, new, shiny house." But the more
she heard that, the more Pat cried. "She didn't understand," Pat says. "If I had
wanted a big, new, shiny house I would have bought one 12 years ago. The old
house is gone. And it's going to be gone forever." The shock of that stayed
around for months. "I cried every day," she says. "Anything could make me cry.
Boo could make me cry. Hello could make me cry. Somebody being nice. Anything. I
got so tired of seeing people who made me feel good because when I saw them I'd
just start crying. I thought I'd never stop. I cried every day for three months.
Every day. Every day."

When she wasn't crying, Pat Faris was studying an architect's blueprints of the
house they hoped to build. She and Tom were ambitious at first and had planned
to ring it around the pool as a way to keep it back off the road. But the first
bids came in high. "We kept saying keep it low," Pat says, recalling endless
talks with contractors. "We got in one bid and it was high. And then we got
another and it was high. The third bid came in at $251,000 and I started crying
because I thought we were just not going to be able to build a house at all. We
were saying keep it low and they came in at a quarter million." Their old
mortgage was almost paid off. They resigned themselves to a new one, defined by
their insurance payment. They trimmed their plans. Another delay. Another set of
blueprints. A smaller house. Months passed.

While the Farises were getting through life in their trailer, JoAnn Browne, a
Dade County schoolteacher, was realizing what to many Americans is a lifelong
dream. Now 50, and having lived as a renter all her life, she was finally
becoming a homeowner. "We had to get some place to live," she says, explaining
that the family's rented house near the Homestead Air Force Base was ruined and
she had only $100 in the bank and no insurance to speak of.

"This whole street was devastated," she says of her new neighborhood in Naranja.
"But here stood this cute house right here. It was put together and it looked so
sweet and it had this big sign, Bishop Realty." Her housing expenses jumped from
$690 in rent to $939 when she combined an F.H.A. mortgage, a credit union loan
and a small-business association loan. In exchange for the 36 percent increase
in monthly costs she had a smaller house but a sense of permanence. Or so she
thought.

Her first sign of trouble came in the form of a note stuck on her door. It was
from the county: "Final inspection not approved." She had no idea what it meant,
since she thought the real-estate company had tended to all those details, but
it gave her a bad feeling. She called her real-estate agent. They told her to
ignore the notice, that the county must have gone to the wrong house. But she
worried anyway and asked a friend at work. He said the county could come and
kick the family out if the inspections were not made and passed. She got more
anxious, still, when she found that the tin taps holding down her roofing
material were spaced too far apart to meet the county's newly strengthened
building codes. Worse, when the roofing expert was outside checking the
workmanship, he laughed and told JoAnn Browne to watch his feet. She did, and
saw them rising up and down as he walked across her roof "just like he was on a
trampoline."

The toll that this has taken is apparent across her face. A handsome,
large-boned black woman, she has deep circles beneath her eyes and a permanent
frown gathering around her lips. She says she used to consider herself a
survivor, a doer, a person who could make things happen while others sat to one
side fretting. Now, she says, she can't find the spark that got her up each day.
She dreads protracted battles with the county, endless reconstruction bills that
she can ill afford and perhaps, at worst, losing the house completely and ending
up in debt. "I sit in shock at this moment," she says. "This was never my dream
house. But I thought I had a little house that I could make into something. I
try to stay busy so I won't get depressed. But it weighs on you. It troubles
you. It troubles your heart."

There is no question that her roof is bad. In March, when Florida was hit with a
second battering in less than eight months, half her shingles swirled away and
landed in her yard. On sunny days, she can see light through a crack in her
front door where flashing was never installed. More troubles probably await.
"The sellers," she says, "they were military, and when the Homestead Air Force
Base went they were trying to just get out fast." She doesn't blame them. She
hardly knows who to blame. Instead, she sits in her house and waits for her old
verve to return. "I can't get started," she says. "It's like I'm just waiting.
But I don't know what I'm waiting for."

Contractors from hell, they call them. It has become the phrase of the year, the
encapsulation of disaster on the heels of tragedy. Bad roofs, leaky plumbing,
doors that don't close, lights that go out, rip-offs and delays, frustrations
and fistfights, thieves who run off with tens of thousands of dollars in cash
deposit. The stories are legion. Most are true. Those residents who don't have a
story of their own to tell talk instead of their neighbor, their best friend,
their in-laws, a colleague at work or someone else.

The Miami Herald recently announced a Contractor Horror Story Contest with a
first-place award of $1,000. Calling on readers to share their worst woes they
warned: "It's not enough to have suffered horribly. You need to capture the
style of the people who have raked you across the coals, record accurately their
patois of obfuscation and excuse, reflect insightfully on the psychological and
spiritual costs of their ravages." Some of those stories are bound to become
legends in time. Some already have that cast, as though invented by a mad genius
trying to figure out how many ways bureaucracy and humanity could clash.

LIKE MOST hurricanes, Andrew started as little more than a gust of wind. Weather
patterns and wind currents whipped and concentrated it. The trade winds took it
west, from the coast of Africa where it was initially identified on Aug. 14 as a
tropical wave (which form every few days during hurricane season) then blew it
off toward the Bahamas.

For days it ebbed and flowed with maddening inconsistency. Computerized
projections were made and remade and tossed out as the storm grew and changed.
On Aug. 20 an Air Force Reserve unit reconnaissance aircraft flew into it and
found "only a diffuse low-level circulation center" but with "vigorous
circulation aloft," according to a report prepared by Sheets. It officially
became a hurricane on Aug. 22. Thirty-six hours later it was near its peak
intensity when it slammed into land. Small and furious, it had gained momentum
just as a figure skater does, spinning in tighter and tighter circles, faster
and faster until its center was just a blur of speed.

Every hurricane has its own particular signature and style. Andrew moved fast
and hit hard, leaving its worst destruction in a path across south Dade County,
missing the glass skyscrapers and the crush of population in Miami. Had wind
speeds and barometric pressures and other atmospheric conditions been slightly
different it could have been bigger, slower, just as violent and directed about
20 miles to the north, running in a straight line for Miami, Fort Myers, Naples
and then on to New Orleans. Bullseye after bullseye. There are few who take
comfort in that what could have been. But Sheets does.

"We came so close to being the storm system of all time in the United States. It
was just pure luck that it didn't happen," he says. To the 80 percent of Dade
County's population that lived above the worst destruction, that was good news.
For the 20 percent who populate the more rural lands of the county's southern
half it gives scant comfort.

Some in south Dade just picked up and left the mess behind. Thousands of houses
still stand empty, mildewed and foul-smelling, the owners long gone. A study by
the Metropolitan Dade County Planning Department estimated in May that at least
57,000 people had moved out of the county entirely. South Dade, where the
population dropped to levels not seen since 1981, is projected to be 30,000
people short of its pre-hurricane total in the year 2010.

Some people are still leaving, or deciding to. Patricia A. Tolle, who works in
public relations at the Everglades National Park, has lived near the air base
with her husband, Albert, a retired Air Force master sergeant, since their
return from the Philippines in 1967. They had planned to stay in South Florida
-- for the weather, she says with a laugh. But after the hurricane they faced
the million difficulties of repairing their home and renovating a coral rock
house once owned by Maude Harriott, a Florida naturalist. First they abandoned
their renovation project. Then they started to rethink their whole retirement
plan.

It wasn't reasoning but frustration and the sense that the county had changed in
some fundamental way that finally made up their minds. "I have a sense of
abandonment," she says. "Immediately after we were going to stay. But after a
while you just lose your energy." The final straw came when they were trying to
put up a small tool shed. The Tolles did everything they could to follow code.
They spent three hours in line at a permit office in Miami. They bought a
preapproved shed and checked all the county codes. Then a county inspector came
along and flunked the building.

"This wasn't a house," she says, emphatically. "It was a shed. A preapproved
toolshed. No electric. No plumbing. A shed. We didn't need a zoning variance. We
paid $75 for the permit. We stood in line. And now they say the tie-downs don't
meet their standards so they failed the inspection. It's illegal! But the
inspector didn't even tell us what was wrong with the tie-downs. He just said we
flunked. That's when we threw up our hands." In time, they are moving back to
Arkansas where they own lakefront property. Another staff member at the park is
leaving because when she finally went off on holiday, someone crashed through
the sliding glass doors it had taken her family three months to have installed
and burglarized the house. That was it.

Storms and freezes and bad runs of luck in South Florida have always had a
clearing effect. In 1895, when a hard freeze swept below the frost line and
ruined acre after acre of orange groves, some settlers got out of town so fast
they left their houses behind them, still fully furnished. Now, some are leaving
just because they can't take the ugliness or the hassles or the heat that bears
down without the mercy of old shade trees. Others stay, regardless, their lives
forever intertwined with that rough landscape. They know the place and see
through its deceptive overlap of ease. Through the sun and the mosquitoes and
the winds that sometimes tear and claw and take it all down a notch, 20 feet
here, a roof there, a life there, they stay.

"It's different now," says Barbara Seniors Harkins, JoAnn Browne's sister, a
teacher whose house was ripped up in the storm and whose husband died shortly
after it. "There is no shade now. It's mean and ugly here. I can see why people
go. A lot of my friends were military. And they are gone now, mostly."

Her husband, a retired military man himself, and a veteran of the Vietnam War,
had planned to stay. But last October, Barbara Harkins came home to find her
husband dead on the kitchen floor. "He was so happy after that hurricane," she
says. He kept telling the story of the storm over and over, and of how Barbara
had shrieked at him that her mother was gone, her father, her stepmother and she
wasn't going to lose him, too. He was proud hearing that. She had never been
much for expressing emotion. So he told that story over and over. Then he was
gone and they never had a chance to say goodbye. Now, she stays.  "The area
looks horrible. My life has changed. After the hurricane, we weren't even going
to church." She thought of leaving. She got over it.

Robert Barnum never thought of leaving. He wouldn't. The sun and soil are his
whole life. Now 40, he has spent most of his adult life creating what can best
be described as a DNA museum for trees. "It was a jungle in here," he says,
bumping around his 40-acre farm in a battered white Nissan truck. "Now, it's a
savannah." For more than a decade he held hurricane insurance. Last year he let
it go. He estimates his losses as just shy of half a million dollars. But he
does not want a loan. "I'll get by," he says. "I plant trees that take 300 years
to grow. I take the long view."

Ten months after they started trying to sort through their splintered lives, Pat
and Tom Faris finally signed a contract for their new house on July 6. A
contractor came in with a bid for $148,000 and agreed to do everything they
needed. Tom signed the contract at work, up in Fort Lauderdale. They laughed
when he got home about the horrors that had gone before. "We had Slick Willie
and Fast Eddie and everyone else out here," he says.

The Farises call their new house "the bunker" with a mixture of sadness and
respect. It will be made of solid cinder block with a special room reinforced to
weather hurricanes and other acts of God. Another room is being built to protect
whatever birds they have. A wall will sport the evidence of the winds of 1992,
all of it framed in fragments from 1909. It will never be the same. They know
that. But it will be home. And that trailer will finally be hauled away. "I
don't know," says Pat, drawing on a cigarrette and gazing at a newborn bird. "I
feel lucky."

THE HEAT IN SOUTH Florida was the same this summer as usual. The clouds rolled
in most afternoons and sometimes dunked the place with rain. The Homestead Air
Force Base has been saved, though it will be trimmed to about one-fifth its
former size. The Burger King headquarters is due to reopen in September, with a
complete physical and psychic renovation. The company has moved to flex time and
no dress codes, two things that were being agonizingly considered before the
storm and became near necessities after it. The company vice presidents have
been moved away from the window offices facing out to sea and moved into smaller
spaces in the same areas with the workers whom they supervise.

After the storm all the rules were broken. "We've tried to keep that feeling of
no hierarchy," says Barry J. Gibbons, the chairman, walking around the
construction site in black blue jeans, a polo shirt and a hard hat. "What the
storm told us was that we had become silted up. We had administrative
cholesterol. Now we're trying to have a sense of fun." His own office has shrunk
to a third its former size and moved inside. He will not even have a door to
close. He thinks the biggest change that he went through as a top corporate
manager was that he hugged employees for the first time in his life. He is still
hugging them. It is, he said, "a massive attitude change."

Kate Hale and Bob Sheets are planning for new disasters. They know there could
be a worse storm this year, or perhaps none at all. Barbara Harkins is nearly
finished with the work on her trim house, though the bathroom mirror is so high
she can not even see herself. The attendance at the St. Paul Missionary Baptist
Church in southwest Homestead is still off. It may or may not pick up. That's
how things go. People are still preoccupied and busy.

The thing about hurricanes, says Pal Brooks, who before the hurricane did 75
percent of his business with Florida fruit and since has been doing 95 percent
of his business with fruit grown outside the United States, is that they change
everything.  "Everybody survives hurricanes," he says. "They don't really kill
people. They just screw up your mind."

One thing hasn't changed, though. When the sun burns white and the sky turns
white around it, it is hot in south Dade County. And when the sun shines on the
coral rock it burns the eyes. These days, though, and for a long time yet to
come, there are few trees to huddle under and precious little shade.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In Homestead Fla., beheaded royal palms, top left, guard an
abandoned apartment house. A house with new roof tiles and windows overlooks the
rubble of its former interior. (Photographs by JilL Freedman/Saba, for The New
York Times)(pg. 22-23); Pat and Tom Faris, with menagerie, in the trailer that
has been home since their 1909 house was destroyed. (Jill Freedman/Saba, for The
New York Times)(pg. 24); The Farises, with a friend, Mary Falconer, right, in
front of the house they had lovingly restored over 10 years. (Collection of Mary
Falconer)(pg. 25)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile: Robert A. Iger;
A Strong Signal to a Man Who May Be King at ABC

BYLINE: By GERALDINE FABRIKANT

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1838 words


FEW executives get higher marks for good management than Thomas S. Murphy,
chairman, and Daniel B. Burke, chief executive, of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. After
building Capital Cities into one of the most profitable television-station
companies, they acquired ABC in 1986, integrating the two companies well during
a rough period for broadcasting.

If their record has had a flaw, it has been the failure to prepare for
succession. Capital Cities/ABC has never had an obvious team of young executives
groomed to take over when Mr. Murphy, who is 68, and Mr. Burke, 64, eventually
retire. Mr. Burke is already scheduled to retire next February.

The company's announcement 10 days ago that Robert A. Iger, a senior vice
president, would become executive vice president was a clear signal that Messrs.
Murphy and Burke are trying to remedy that problem. The promotion was the third
in seven months for Mr. Iger, who is only 42.

Mr. Iger is a logical choice for a company committed to promoting insiders. In
the 18 years since he began at ABC, he has shown a keen ability to manage
people. And as head of ABC Entertainment, working in Los Angeles between 1989
and 1992, he ran the crucial prime-time programming operations, if not
brilliantly, at least well. He closed the ratings gap between second-place ABC
and the front-runner, though ABC never took the lead, increased the
profitability of prime time despite a difficult economic environment, and
enjoyed no major turnover in management.

Mr. Iger had final say on which programs went on the prime-time schedule. In
that role, he bet successfully on the comedy "Home Improvement," which has been
a hit from the start and finished third in the ratings last season. Also, the
low-cost, immensely profitable comedy "America's Funniest Home Videos" made its
debut under him.

In a contrarian move at a network chasing younger audiences, Mr. Iger signed the
detective series "Matlock" after Fred Silverman, whose company produces the
show, learned that NBC had decided to drop the show. Mr. Silverman asked Mr.
Iger whether ABC wanted it, and "Bob made the decision within five minutes," Mr.
Silverman recalled. "In Hollywood that is very unusual."

Indeed, industry associates say Mr. Iger can make tough decisions quickly, in
addition to being affable and approachable.

Mr. Iger also oversaw some big flops. He signed the movie producer George Lucas
to do TV sequels to the "Indiana Jones" films. The 22 episodes, almost all of
which aired, cost the company $1 million each. Their poor ratings meant they
were aired only once and could not recoup that cost in reruns.

ABC also lost money on "Cop Rock," the ill-fated police musical conceived by the
producer Steven Bochco.

And it gambled on "Twin Peaks," which garnered publicity more than ratings. But
"Twin Peaks" and other programs did signal to two of Mr. Iger's constituencies
-- Capital Cities management and Hollywood -- that he was willing to take
unorthodox risks.

During his tenure in Hollywood, Mr. Iger also kept the low profile that both Mr.
Murphy and Mr. Burke espouse. He rarely grants interviews (he declined to give
one for this article). Nor was he seen a great deal around Hollywood high spots,
though he had the Los Angeles quota of luxury automobiles -- a BMW and a
Porsche. He sold the Porsche after Mr. Burke complained about how uncomfortable
it was when Mr. Iger used it to chauffeur him during his trips to the West
Coast.

Last January, Mr. Iger was named president of the ABC Television Network Group,
which encompasses not only prime time but the entire programming schedule. In
March, he was named a senior vice president of the corporation. Now, even with
his latest appointment, Mr. Iger is only the frontrunner for the top job. As one
longtime Capital Cities/ABC executive put it, "The job is his to lose." The
executive noted that Capital Cities/ABC's management views programming as the
core of its business, so Mr. Iger's position at ABC Entertainment is a valuable
credential.

Insiders expect that Mr. Murphy will continue as chairman for some time. Whereas
Mr. Burke has told associates he looks forward to leaving and spending time with
the minor-league baseball team he bought, Mr. Murphy thrives on dealing with
company issues.

THAT would allow him to work directly with Mr. Iger. Some think the chairman may
play an even greater role than he has recently. One question for those watching
for signs of a power shift is whether Mr. Iger will be given either of Mr.
Burke's titles -- president and chief executive -- after Mr. Burke's departure.

One Wall Street analyst noted that Mr. Iger has had relatively little exposure
to some of the corporation's crucial constituencies, including Wall Street.

Another crucial question is whether Mr. Iger, whose experience has been in
sports and entertainment operations for the network, will exhibit the vision
necessary to run a company that encompasses not only broadcast television but
also cable television, publishing and forays into new businesses, including
pay-per-view and high-definition television. Capital Cities/ABC owns the ESPN
cable sports network and a host of newspapers and magazines, including Women's
Wear Daily and Institutional Investor.

But the new businesses are growing in importance as the way entertainment and
information is packaged and delivered evolves with dizzying advances in
communications and computer technology.

The $5.3 billion company has $1.2 billion in cash, which gives it a lot of
flexibility in making strategic investments. "What you don't have now is a
dealmaker," said Dennis Leibowitz, who follows the company for Donaldson Lufkin
& Jenrette. "That is why Murphy is important."

Executives like Ted Turner and Rupert Murdoch have benefited handsomely by
positioning their companies to take advantage of emerging trends. In recent
months, Mr. Iger has met with executives at telephone companies and in Silicon
Valley to educate himself.

Mr. Murphy and Mr. Burke may well value careful management more than vision,
however. They built their businesses slowly and carefully, sticking to what they
knew best -- managing television stations. Not until Mr. Murphy was in his early
60's did he significantly expand Capital Cities.

Since his childhood in Oceanside, L.I., Mr. Iger has always liked television.
After he was graduated magna cum laude from Ithaca College with a major in
television and radio, he worked a short stint as a television weatherman. It
convinced him he would never be more than mediocre, so in 1974 he joined ABC,
taking an entry-level job preparing studios for the filming of soap operas and
game shows.

Despite his reputation as a "people person," one of his bosses was not happy
with him. Mr. Iger moved to ABC Sports as a supervisor for production of sports
programs.

A year later, he was manager of program planning for "Wide World of Sports,"
suggesting events to cover, negotiating for the rights to events like cliff
diving and wrist wrestling, and then scheduling the events.

Those events led to jobs in which he made decisions about licensing the right to
broadcast sports events, which involved dealing with affiliates and the sales
division, among others. Those events ranged from boxing matches to the Olympic
Games.

At the 1988 Winter Games in Calgary, the weather proved unusually warm and
events had to be rescheduled; that task fell to Mr. Iger. One Capital Cities/ABC
executive said Mr. Iger's handling of the problems impressed his superiors.

Later that year, he was tapped to become executive vice president for the
television network group. That job put Mr. Iger in charge of business affairs,
which included negotiating for prime-time programming. In some cases he also
became involved with scheduling. For example, if the news department wanted to
do a special on whether the budget would pass, Mr. Iger became the traffic cop,
working with news and entertainment to find time for the program.

When management brought in Mr. Iger to replace Brandon Stoddard as president of
ABC Entertainment, the move was considered unorthodox. Mr. Iger has said that
even he was somewhat surprised by the appointment.

Although Mr. Iger dedicated himself to the endless business of reading scripts,
friends say he does not have the obsession with programming that is
characteristic of some network heads. "The trick is not to take it too
seriously," he has said. Indeed, associates say, since his return to New York he
has read relatively few scripts and prefers nonfiction reading, like "We Were
Soldiers Once . . . And Young," a book about Vietnam. His hobbies include
sailing and cooking. He likes cooking because it allows him to turn out a
product himself, something that executives do not really do.

That Mr. Iger was not a zealous programmer may have benefited him in moving up
the ladder, because his interest was as much in managing as in raising ratings.

Mr. Iger has told associates, and even mentioned in discussions with Mr. Burke,
that he never had as his goal either running the network or its parent company.
Mr. Iger is more prone to describe himself as a man of modest goals who wanted
to do each job well. In a recent speech at his alma mater, Mr. Iger said he
viewed patience as the most important quality in getting ahead. "It keeps you
from making mistakes," he has said. "I have seen impatience ruin more careers
than anything else."

But beneath that seeming lack of focus on the long term may lie an ardent
determination. Today he is clearly aware that he is being considered as the heir
to Capital Cities/ ABC. Indeed, after he and his wife separated, he acknowledged
to an associate that he had considered the career implications of the split at a
company where the chairman and the president boast decades-long marriages and
where some have said, only half-jokingly, that divorce can be a liability. (He
and his wife have two daughters.)

Times have changed, of course, and both of Mr. Iger's most obvious rivals to run
the company -- Stephen A. Weiswasser and David Westin -- are divorced.

Like Mr. Iger, both men were promoted 10 days ago. Mr. Weiswasser was named
president of the Capital Cities/ABC Multimedia Group and senior vice president
of the corporation. Mr. Westin became a senior vice president and president of
production for the network group.

But Mr. Weiswasser, 52, who was executive vice president at ABC News from 1991
to 1993, has had less programming experience, which at least one longtime
Capital Cities executive thinks makes him a less likely candidate for the top
job.

Television executives think Mr. Westin, who joined the company only two years
ago and comes from the legal side, is on the fast track. However, he has had no
programming experience.

That means Mr. Iger has at least a strong opportunity. In a succinct analysis,
he recently said: "There was a message sent to me that I had the potential. For
the record, there is nothing promised or guaranteed."


NAME: Robert A. Iger

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Iger has made his mark as a manager more than as a
programmer. (ABC)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Custody Trial Explores Backgrounds of Rivals

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words

DATELINE: SARASOTA, Fla., Aug. 7


Regina Twigg still has a bedroom in her home reserved for Kimberly Mays, even
though the teen-ager testified this week that she wants nothing to do with Mrs.
Twigg, her natural mother.

The parent Kimberly does want to be with, Robert Mays, has complained to a
psychologist that the nation's most unusual child custody case in years has made
him feel as if he were "back in Vietnam," and "like I never know what's coming
next."

It is the fate of Kimberly, a 14-year-old girl switched at birth with another
infant, that is being decided in a courtroom here. But the proceedings this week
also shed light on the characters and temperaments of both the woman who gave
birth to her and the man she now calls father.

Two related issues are being argued before Judge Stephen Dakan at the Sarasota
County Courthouse here: Mrs. Twigg and her husband, Ernest, are seeking to win
back the visitation rights they claim Mr. Mays has capriciously denied them,
while Kimberly, following the example of another Florida child, wants the court
to sever all ties to her natural parents.

Testimony in the civil case, which has already been the subject of a television
series and a book, is scheduled to resume on Monday. Judge Dakan is expected to
rule later this month on both requests, which are likely then to be appealed
regardless of the outcome.

An Unsympathetic Public

Judging by letters to the editor and calls to radio talk shows here and around
the country, Mrs. Twigg has not won the sympathy of the public in her interviews
with the likes of Oprah Winfrey or with the testimony by and about her in court.
This week, she once again accused Mr. Mays of helping switch the two babies days
after they were born in a hospital east of here, and was said to have insisted
on calling Kimberly by the name of her dead daughter, Arlena.

Mrs. Twigg's own past, as shown by court records, testimony and her declarations
out of court, is nearly as troubled as Kimberly's. Her father abandoned his
family when she was an infant, and her mother remarried, became ill and gave the
children up for adoption when Mrs. Twigg, born Mary Lee Madrid, was 4 years old.

In the home for children where Mrs. Twigg spent much of the next five years, she
watched as a brother and twin sisters were adopted and disappeared from her
life. When she finally found a home of her own at age 9, after having spent time
with several other potential adoptive parents, the family that adopted her
changed her name to Regina Burge.

Mrs. Twigg married at 23 and became the mother of seven children. But in 1975,
she gave birth to a baby girl, who died of a heart defect at 7 weeks of age.
Kimberly was born three years later, but the Twiggs, through a yet-unexplained
switch in the hospital, went home with another baby girl who spent much of the
next nine years in and out of hospitals, draining the family's finances before
she too died of a heart ailment following surgery.

Destabilizing Factors

On Friday, Dr. Lawrence Ritt, a psychologist who has counseled both Kimberly and
Robert Mays, testified that he was unhappy when he learned that Mrs. Twigg had
discussed her own status as an adopted child with Kimberly. He said Mrs. Twigg
made the disclosure before establishing a real relationship with the child and
in general had "lost her ability to be sensitive to Kimberly's needs."

But the experts on children who took the stand or testified by videotape also
indicated that the unexpected emergence of Mrs. Twigg was not the only source of
instability or tension in Kimberly's life. While generally praising Mr. Mays as
a devoted and loving father, they pointed to the absence in Kimberly's
upbringing of a reliable and enduring maternal figure.

The woman Kimberly first knew as her mother, Barbara Mays, died of ovarian
cancer when the girl was 2 years old. Five weeks before her death, Mrs. Mays
filed for divorce from her husband. Mr. Mays has said she believed that she had
become a burden to him and had moved, with Kimberly, back to her parents' house.

Two months after Barbara Mays's death, Robert Mays married Cynthia Tanner, a
receptionist in the cancer ward where Barbara Mays had been treated. For more
than four years after Barbara Mays's death, he prevented Kimberly's maternal
grandparents from visiting her, angry that they had supported their daughter in
the divorce from him. He relented only when they went to court to seek an order
granting them rights to see the child.

When Kimberly was nearly 7 and about to renew ties with her grandparents, Mr.
Mays informed her that Ms. Tanner was not her birth mother. Two years later, Mr.
Mays and his second wife divorced, and after another dispute over visitation
arose, he prevented Kimberly from having contact with her step-mother.

Hearing Herself Described

Ms. Tanner now accuses Mr. Mays of having physically and mentally abused
Kimberly. Though her charges were not part of the proceedings here, they echo
statements of the Twiggs and Dr. Harold Smith, a psychologist sympathetic to
their position, whose testimony this week described Mr. Mays as controlling and
manipulative.

Mr. Mays later married again. Dr. Ritt testified that in his early dealings with
Kimberly, she showed a reluctance to form an emotional bond with Darlena Mays,
Robert Mays's third wife and the woman Kimberly now calls mother.

Kimberly has heard much of the testimony about her emotions and state of mind,
sitting with her father and his legal team, carefully taking notes or drawing
pictures. Occasionally, though, she has skipped a session.

"All this has been hard on her," said Arthur Ginsburg, one of her lawyers. "She
needs a little break from it all."

If nothing else, all the time spent with psychologists in the last five years
has given Kimberly a familiarity with the jargon of their trade. Asked on the
stand Thursday to describe Mr. Mays's relationship with her, she called it
nurturing.

Wiping away tears and bowing her head, she also complained of being "put in an
awkward position" and robbed of her childhood. "I've had to grow up a lot
faster," she said.

Signs of Embarrassment

On occasion, though, there were signs that the poised, well-spoken young woman
still retains traces of a child. When Dr. Ritt told how Kimberly had confided to
him that she worried about what the case might be doing to her father's health,
pointing out that his hair had turned gray and he appeared to have aged, she
seemed embarrassed. With Mr. Mays smiling in amusement, she patted his back,
hugged him and then gently kissed him on the cheek.

Dr. Smith described Kimberly as a vibrant, resilient and healthy child who has
been largely unaffected by the ordeal she has gone through. But Dr. Ritt said
Kimberly had been troubled by night terrors, including dreams in which her
mother disappeared or her father died.

"I really feel like I'm being spun around," he recalled her telling him last
year. "I'm a kid, and I feel like I'm being treated like dirt."

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 569 words


The Rev. Homer A. Jack, a Unitarian minister who headed a United Nations
disarmament agency for a decade and championed other peace and civil rights
causes, died at his home in Swarthmore, Pa., on Thursday. He was 77.

The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.

Dr. Jack founded the United Nations Non-Governmental Committee on Disarmament in
the early 1970's and was its chairman till 1983. In that post, he prodded
governments to reverse the arms buildup and prevent a recurrence of nuclear
warfare.

"It's not enough to write or preach about brotherhood and peace," he once said.
"One must try however one can to jump into the fray."

He was also a founder of the National Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy and
served as executive director from 1960 to 1964. And he was secretary-general of
the World Conference on Religion and Peace from 1970 to 1983.

He was a founder of the Congress on Racial Equality. From 1944 to 1948 he was
executive director of the Chicago Council Against Racial and Religious
Discrimination. He was chairman of the Association of Fair Housing Committees in
New York City in the 1960's and organized Unitarian ministers for the 1965 march
from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. From 1950 to 1959 he was vice chairman of the
American Civil Liberties Union in Illinois.

Dr. Jack criticized his own country as well as other nations. "I just don't see
the world community working as fast on this thing as is needed," he said of
disarmament in 1982. "I'm terribly pessimistic, but we have to keep pushing on."

In 1980 he said, "U.S. tactics only increased the danger of the spread of
nuclear weapons -- certainly a disservice to both U.S. policy and world
interests." In the 1970's he denounced United States actions on world hunger,
saying, "I was ashamed to be an American."

Dr. Jack assailed McCarthyism as well as Soviet totalitarianism and
anti-Semitism. He supported China's entry to the United Nations, criticized the
group's resolution equating Zionism with racism, was an early foe of the Vietnam
War, opposed massacres in Bangladesh, spoke out against Indira Gandhi's curbs on
civil liberties, criticized the Central Intelligence Agency's support of the
military regime in Greece and fought apartheid.

Born in Rochester, N.Y., he graduated from Cornell University and earned a
master's degree and doctorate in science there. But, he said, "I became more
interested in men than in mice."

While studying at Meadville Theological School in Chicago, he became friends
with pacifists and civil rights organizers like A. J. Muste, Bayard Rustin and
James Farmer.

Dr. Jack served as pastor of a Unitarian church in Evanston, Ill., from 1948 to
1959 and briefly at churches in Litchfield, Ill., and Lawrence, Kan. He was also
director of the Social Responsibility Division of Unitarian Universalist
Association for North America.

An advocate of Mahatma Gandhi's nonviolent resistance, he compiled "Wit and
Wisdom of Gandhi" and "The Gandhi Reader." He also wrote about Albert
Schweitzer, whom he visited several times, and served on the board of the Albert
Schweitzer Foundation. He also edited several books on disarmament, peace and
religion.

His first marriage ended in divorce.

His survivors include his wife of 21 years, the former Ingeborg Kind; a son,
Alexander of Hinsdale, Mass.; a daughter, Lucy Jack Williams of Brookline,
Mass., and four grandchildren.

NAME: Homer A. Jack

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography
HEADLINE>Homer A. Jack, 77; Led Agency at U.N. Against Arms Race

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
When It Comes to the Hereafter, Romance and Sentiment Rule

BYLINE: By KENNETH M. CHANKO;  Kenneth M. Chanko writes about movies and video
for Entertainment Weekly and Parenting.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1515 words


EVER SINCE THE 1937 "TOPPER" became a hit, spawning two sequels and a television
series, Hollywood has been dabbling in ghost stories. For decades, movies set in
haunted houses were a horror staple. In the past few years, however, it has been
fanciful romantic comedies and dramas like "Ghost" (1990), which earned more
than $200 million at the box office, and the sentimental "Field of Dreams"
(1989), with its baseball-playing ghosts, that seem to beguile Hollywood.

The basic conceit of these ghost movies is that the dearly departed return to
guide, reclaim or pester the folks who are left behind. On the heels of two
recently released ghost comedies, "Hocus Pocus" and "My Boyfriend's Back," comes
the spirits-in-limbo sweepstakes "Heart and Souls," which opens on Friday with
Robert Downey Jr. as a mortal with four soul mates.

Ron Underwood, like most directors working the territory, has not blown the
budget on pie-in-the-sky sets. Few heaven-related movies devote much time to
heaven. That would be a bore. The appeal of ghost movies, not hard to
understand, is to have dead people take matters in hand and reconnect with the
living, which usually turns out to be character-building, or at least
comforting, for all.

The draw of such movies is, of course, the primal fear of death and the happy
possibility of an afterlife. But most also affirm that a moral code is still
operational in the hereafter, and that ghosts will be able to obtain a measure
of justice or, failing that, revenge.

The touchstone for many of the recent ghost movies ("Heart and Souls" included)
is "It's a Wonderful Life," in which Clarence the guardian angel steers James
Stewart back to his family and friends. It is this film's humanistic spirit that
movies like "Heart and Souls" try to capture. In uncertain times, the conceit is
that everyone has a guardian angel like Clarence. "It's much more comforting
when the spirits turn out to be good ones," says Stuart Fischoff, a media
psychologist in Los Angeles. "Those movies play very well -- as long as they are
nondenominational."

In "Heart and Souls," four people who randomly board a bus in 1959 perish in a
crash. Their spirits then witness the birth of baby Thomas (who will grow into
Mr. Downey) in a car near the crash site. Perceived by the child's parents as
"imaginary friends," these four spirits -- a two-bit thief (Tom Sizemore), a
timid would-be singer (Charles Grodin), a young woman (Kyra Sedgwick) trying to
reach her boyfriend and a single working mother (Alfre Woodard) -- can be seen
and heard only by Thomas. Years later, Thomas (now a callow yuppie) is called on
to help the four ghosts right old wrongs and wrap up their lives. Through those
good deeds, Thomas learns to value what's really important.

Thus "Heart and Souls" pushes more than the usual number of buttons for a movie
of this kind: childhood fears of abandonment are played upon (when Thomas is 7,
his angels decide to leave him by making themselves invisible -- for his own
good, of course) and the wishes of a single mother are satisfied when she learns
how her children fared after her death. And throughout there is the notion that
one can form one's own nourishing circle of friends, even if those friends
happen to be dead.

Movies like "Heart and Souls" speak to our innermost anxieties, according to
Arthur Kovacs, a Los Angeles-based psychologist. Mr. Kovacs believes such films
are especially appealing these days. "The hard economic times, our aging
population and the continuing erosion of traditional religions among the more
educated middle and upper classes contribute to their popularity," he says.

PARTICULARLY SUSCEPTIBLE is the aging baby boomer, who faces a precarious
economic future and may be prone to worries about dying (partly because he or
she has doubts about an afterlife). By the time baby boomers have reached their
late 40's, it's also possible that at least one parent has died. The loss of
someone close -- especially in this age of AIDS -- only fuels the kinds of
thoughts and yearnings these movies play to.

For Hollywood, the trick is to raise the subject of death without dwelling on
it. Diane Keaton's 1987 documentary "Heaven" was a box-office disappointment,
and Ms. Keaton has a good idea why. "I don't think most people really want to
think too directly or too long about death," she says. For that reason, most of
these movies resist overt religious overtones (the few that don't, like
"Resurrection" and "The Rapture," pay a price at the box office).

Mr. Underwood, whose last film was "City Slickers," is comfortable working under
the halo of secular humanism. "I'm not looking for people to debate the
possibility of life after death," he says. "I'd prefer they come out of the
theater valuing, here and now, their relationships with loved ones."

The more popular ghost movies have always reflected the times in which they are
made. "We've been interested in what happens after death for at least 20,000
years," says Dr. James Lundy, a retired social psychologist and ordained
minister in Greensboro, N.C. Dr. Lundy points out, "When religions don't fulfill
society's needs or assuage people's fears -- which often involve fears about
dying -- popular culture takes over." As much as reflecting our fears, stories
about ghosts function as projections of our fantasies.

Take the blithe goings-on in the 30's escapist film "Topper." The Depression
didn't burst the bubble of the Kirbys (Cary Grant and Constance Bennett), who
traipsed off to places like the Rainbow Room at the drop of a hat. Once they
died in a car accident, their good deed consisted of making the timorous Cosmo
Topper (Roland Young) as happy-go-lucky as they were.

It isn't difficult to see why a movie like "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir" struck a
chord in 1947, with many women trying to get on with their lives after losing
husbands in the war. In the film, a young widow with a small child falls in love
with the ghost of a handsome sea captain.

Other than the standard haunted-house B movie, the 1950's and early 60's offered
few ghost films. Says Dr. Kovacs, "Those movies tend to pop up when society is
in turmoil or traditional values are on the wane. We knew what we stood for in
the 50's."

Tales involving the spirit world weren't terribly relevant in the late 60's and
early 70's, either, since revolutionary cosmic entertainments like "2001: A
Space Odyssey" were capturing the imagination. In the post-Vietnam era, Warren
Beatty's 1978 film "Heaven Can Wait" (about a football player who is taken
before his time and allowed to return to Earth) scored a modest success by
positing that one's true love can be found and happiness attained -- even in the
most muddled of circumstances. In general, when film makers want to appeal to a
young-adult audience (not yet ruminating over its own mortality), romance is
played up.

The 80's saw a proliferation of silly, special-effects-laden hits like
"Ghostbusters" and "Beetlejuice." Since those were times when thoughts of
self-improvement took a back seat to money-making schemes, it's worth noting
that in "Ghostbusters" vanquishing the spirits provided gainful employment for
the carefree main characters.

" 'Heart and Souls' wouldn't have worked very well in the mid-80's," says Mr.
Underwood. "People like Thomas were being championed then for the very things
we're now saying aren't what's really important."

Two years after the 1987 stock market crash, which essentially brought the
high-flying 80's to an end, along came "Field of Dreams." In that box-office
hit, the road to redemption and inner peace for the Kevin Costner character
seemed to lead as well to almost-certain financial ruin.

"Ghost" was a notable hybrid in that it played on our doubts and fantasies yet
was romantic to boot, which presumably accounts for its huge grosses. The film
spent most of its time on the gratifying premise that even after death we remain
connected to loved ones.

In the 1991 film "Defending Your Life," Albert Brooks set his entire movie about
the afterlife in the Las Vegas-like Judgment City, where people must defend
their spiritually hampered lives before progressing to the next level. But the
limbo this idiosyncratic film envisions isn't as bad as it first seems. It's a
place where you benefit from a not-too-painful analysis. And you can eat all you
want and not get fat.

What many recent movies, especially "Heart and Souls," share is a humanistic,
nonmaterialistic point of view. "As long as you don't get too preachy or
self-righteous about it, people will go for this kind of thing," says Mr.
Downey. "With the coming of the millennium, people are ready to look at things
differently."

Since you can't take it with you, the rejection of material gain isn't a
surprising theme in movies about the spirit world. But there's a certain irony
when one considers the purveyor of the message. Sean Daniel, one of the
producers of "Heart and Souls," recognizes that when he says, "Isn't it noble of
Hollywood to deal with the materialism issue in this way?"

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kyra Sedgwick and Robert Downey Jr. in "Heart and
Souls"--Pushing lots of buttons. (Bruce Talamon/Universal Pictures) (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Military's Leaders Are Jockeying In Effort to Be Powell's Successor

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDONwith ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


On Tuesday night, President Clinton will be the host for an unusual soiree at
the White House: The guests will be his 16 top military commanders.

For a handful of these admirals and generals, the occasion will test all their
political and diplomatic skills. After dodging danger in Vietnam, logging long
hours to make their superiors look good and maneuvering to reach the military's
top echelons, they have emerged as the leading candidates to be the next
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Tuesday's dinner is the ultimate
high-pressure dinner with the boss -- with every rival there, too.

As Gen. Colin L. Powell prepares to retire on Sept. 30, the jockeying to succeed
him as the nation's top military man has become one of the armed forces' chief
preoccupations, and among the hottest topics of gossip in this gossipy town.

Adviser and Diplomat

The decision is as important to Mr. Clinton as it is to the Pentagon. Besides
advising the President on the use of military force while presiding over the
shrinking armed forces, the new Chairman must help ease the strains between a
uniformed rank and file that still does not completely trust its Commander in
Chief or his avoiding the draft in the Vietnam War.

Les Aspin, the Secretary of Defense, and W. Anthony Lake, the national security
adviser, have already started winnowing the candidates. Mr. Clinton is expected
to interview two or three of the candidates before making his choice sometime
after Labor Day.

Already, the race is beginning to shake out. Pentagon officials say some of the
early front-runners, like Adm. Paul David Miller, commander of United States
forces in the Atlantic, have dropped from serious consideration. But a dark
horse, Gen. Joseph P. Hoar of the Marine Corps, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's
successor as commander of the United States Central Command, may be leading the
pack.

Resume and Rapport

For each President, the selection of a Chairman of the Joint Chiefs has been
based on a mix of resume and instinct. President Ronald Reagan selected Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., then the head of the Pacific Command, after meeting the
admiral in Hawaii and striking up a good personal rapport.

President George Bush selected General Powell over Gen. Robert Herres, the Vice
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, based on Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's
recommendation and General Powell's previous White House experience as Mr.
Reagan's national security adviser.

Navy admirals or Army generals have filled the Chairman's job for 11 years, so
if tradition is any guide, an Air Force officer should get the nod. But the
Clinton Administration signaled early on that it would not be bound by history,
throwing the field wide open.

Big Shoes to Fill

By all accounts, General Powell's departure means there are big shoes to fill.
During his term as chairman, General Powell was in most instances a conservative
figure; he resisted military intervention in Bosnia, opposed a major
restructuring of the armed forces' roles and missions and argued against
accepting openly gay soldiers in the military. He also developed enormous
credibility with the public, played a major role in shaping national security
policy and was as good a politician as he was a soldier.

While none of General Powell's potential successors are as renowned, Mr. Clinton
will need a chairman who can project General Powell's sense of trustworthiness
and authority.

The contest has its unwritten rules of engagement: military commanders need to
appear serious, but not eager. Admiral Miller became the first casualty,
Pentagon officials said, because he put on "a full-court press" for the job.

Early Front-Runners

Early handicapping puts General Hoar among the front-runners. As commander of
the Central Command, General Hoar has experience in joint military operations.
His post makes him responsible for military operations in Somalia and Iraq,
where the Clinton Administration began its first combat operations. The job as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs has a diplomatic dimension, too, as it demands
shoring up American ties in the Middle East and Southwest Asia.

Tall and articulate but not one to seek the spotlight, General Hoar handles
himself well in public. "He looks the part," one Pentagon official said.

No marine has ever served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. But that may be an
advantage for the Administration, as it would allow the White House to break
ground.

Adm. Charles R. Larson is another top contender. As head of the Pacific Command,
which stretches from the West Coast of the United States to the east coast of
Africa, with 45 countries in between, Admiral Larson has polished his diplomatic
skills.

Mr. Clinton met with Admiral Larson in Hawaii, and the two men even squeezed in
a golf game.

Advantageous Credentials

The main Air Force candidate is Gen. Merrill A. (Tony) McPeak, the Air Force
Chief of Staff. A flinty, rail-thin former fighter pilot who served in the crack
Thunderbird demonstration flight team as a young officer, General McPeak has
ruffled some feathers by restructuring the Air Force. His Air Force credentials
are an advantage in an age in which gunboat diplomacy has been replaced by air
strikes.

The lone Army candidate is Gen. John Shalikashvili, the Polish-born commander of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization who is overseeing the planning of air
strikes in Bosnia.

General Shalikashvili has a sophisticated grasp of the European scene and favors
expanded military contacts with Russia and other members of the former Warsaw
Pact. Picking him would remove him from a critical post at a time of turbulence
in Europe.

An Air Force Intellectual

Other candidates whose chances have appeared to fade include Gen. George L.
(Lee) Butler, head of the Strategic Command, which controls America's nuclear
arsenal. General Butler's greatest strength -- his reputation as a national
security intellectual -- is a potential weakness if the White House decides it
needs someone with more of a "warrior image."

While General Butler has worked hard to keep his command relevant, he has also
been stuck with what is essentially a cold-war billet: planning for nuclear war.
And with General McPeak in the running, General Butler does not have the support
of his parent service.

The final candidate is the current Vice Chairman, Adm. David E. Jeremiah. A
former commander of Navy forces in the Pacific, Admiral Jeremiah regularly
represents the Joint Chiefs at high-level Administration meetings. He could be
an interim choice if Mr. Clinton decides he wants to wait a few years to pick
from another crop of candidates.

From the time the first course is served Tuesday night, this curious hybrid of a
horse race and beauty contest will enter its final round. "Some people are
getting more serious looks than others, and I expect this will be focused on
earnestly for all of August," a senior Pentagon official said.


NAME: Merrill A. (Tony) McPeak; George L. (Lee) Butler; David E. Jeremiah;
Joseph P. Hoar; Charles R. Larson

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  On President Clinton's list to replace Gen. Colin L. Powell as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Gen. George L. (Lee) Butler
Photos/Chart: "Leading the Pack"

Military Branch: Air Force

Age: 54

Background: Head of United States Strategic Command . . . former assistant
professor of political science at Air Force Academy . . . flew F-4C jets in
Vietnam, but later served in transport and bomber units . . . served as a deputy
to Gen. Colin L. Powell and helped design Powell's "base force" plan for a
smaller military . . . master's degree in international relations from
University of Paris.

Gen. Joseph P. Hoar

Military Branch: Marine Corps

Age: 58

Background: Succeeded Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf as head of the U.S. Central
Command, which is responsible for military operations in Persian Gulf and
Southwest Asia . . . oversees American military operations in Somalia and
planned recent strikes on Iraq . . . post involves lot of travel and diplomacy
in the region. Marine rifleman and company commander in Vietnam . . . would be
first Marine chairman.

Adm. David E. Jeremiah

Military Branch: Navy

Age: 59

Background: Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff since March 1990 . . .
former commander of Navy forces in the Pacific . . . known quantity at the White
House, where he regularly represents Joint Chiefs of Staff at high-level
Administration meetings.

Adm. Charles R. Larson

Military Branch: Navy

Age: 56

Background: Commander of U.S. forces in the Pacific . . . former naval aide to
President Nixon . . . former superintendent of the U.S. Naval Academy . . .
trained as an aviator but, in an unusual switch, changed to submarines early in
his career . . . portfolio gives him diplomatic skills . . . said to be
respected by Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and an influential Clinton adviser.

Gen. Merrill A. (Tony) McPeak

Military Branch: Air Force

Age: 57

Background: Air Force Chief of Staff since 1990 . . . former Thunderbird pilot
who flew F-100's and forward air control aircraft in Vietnam . . . air power
advocate who restructured Air Force following the Persian Gulf War . . . health
food zealot who begins each day with uncooked oatmeal and a bran muffin . . .
after Navy sailors criticized President Clinton, General McPeak ordered Air
Force personnel to show respect for the President . . . master's degree in
international relations.

Gen. John Shalikashvili

Military Branch: Army

Age: 57

Background: Polish-born artillery officer who commands NATO at a time of
enormous change in Europe . . . oversees the planning of air strikes in Bosnia
and planning for the deployment of peacekeeping troops to police a possible
settlement there . . . has encouraged military ties with the former Warsaw Pact
. . . supervised military's humanitarian relief operation in Kurdistan after
Persian Gulf war . . . leading Army candidate . . . master's degree in
international relations. (pg. B9)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Taos Journal;
In Defense of a Hero of the Old West

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: TAOS, N.M.


One hundred and twenty-five years after his death, Kit Carson, the legendary
scout and frontiersman of the Old West, is still a big man here. A national
forest outside town is named after him, and his home and grave site are popular
tourist attractions.

So the idea that Carson's reputation needs rehabilitating may sound odd, but
that is just what the people who run the Kit Carson Historic Museum are trying
to do. On July 31 they held a symposium called "Kit Carson: Indian Fighter or
Indian Killer?" to defend his honor.

More than 120 history buffs, some dressed in cowboy hats, boots and bolo ties,
spent seven hours listening to scholars extol Carson's virtues and attack those
who have questioned his character and behavior.

Carson, who was born in Kentucky in 1809 and later moved with his family to the
Missouri frontier, joined a caravan for Santa Fe in 1826 and settled in Taos, in
northern New Mexico, in 1843. At the outbreak of the Civil War he commanded the
First New Mexican Volunteers for the Union, and helped subdue and resettle the
Navajo and other Indian tribes in New Mexico and Texas. He was a brigadier
general when he died in 1868.

Over the last two decades, some historians have suggested that Carson sought out
and killed Navajos and destroyed their sheep and food supply, a theory that has
gained credence with the public. But the scholars here disputed those accounts
and portrayed Carson, who lived alongside Indians most of his life, as a
compassionate man who reluctantly fought several tribes after joining the Army.

"To heap blame on Kit Carson and charge him with the chief responsibility for
all of the Navajos' woes is irresponsible," said Marc Simmons, author of 25
books on the history of the Southwest. "People speak and write today as if it's
an established fact that Kit Carson was some kind of maniacal killer."

Although Carson was the main topic, the symposium, like so many recent
gatherings of historians of the American West, had a political subtext. It was
another skirmish in the war between traditional scholars, who believe that white
settlement of the West is the most important ingredient of the region's history,
and "new Western historians," who paint a multicultural vision of the West.

Each of the six speakers at the symposium was solidly in the traditionalist
camp.

And in an emotional speech at a dinner session, Carson's great-grandson, John
Carson, a high school history teacher in Colorado, said he hoped the conference
would bring people together and heal wounds.

But as soon as the dinner knives were put away, sharper ones were drawn. Some
speakers, like Mr. Simmons, took broad swipes at the new historians, who, he
said, were politicized by the 1960's civil rights movement and the Vietnam War
and improperly transferred their ideological biases to their studies of the Old
West.

Two speakers took direct aim at one of Carson's chief critics, Clifford Trafzer,
a professor of ethnic studies at the University of California at Riverside who
is the author of a 1983 book called "The Last Great Navajo War."

R. C. Gordon-McCutchan, who runs the Carson museum here, dismissed Professor
Trafzer's work as "rhetoric." And Lawrence Kelly, a history professor at the
University of North Texas, called the Trafzer book "bad history" and questioned
the author's scholarship.

Professor Trafzer did not attend the symposium so he could not defend himself.
Mr. Gordon-McCutchan said that he had invited Mr. Trafzer to the conference and
that he had initially accepted but backed out when he learned Professor Kelly
planned to attend. Similarly, Patricia Nelson-Limerick, a history professor at
the University of Colorado who is a leading new Western historian, and scholars
from Navajo Community College in Tsaile, Ariz., were invited but did not attend.

Eve Little, a Navajo journalist covering the conference, was so disturbed by
what she heard that she asked to address the mostly white audience. She said the
history of Carson's campaigns was unbalanced because the Government kept written
records while the Indians relied on oral records of their past.

"The perspective of Native Americans does not count with respect to history of
this great country," Ms. Little said. "Nobody wrote about it, nobody phoned
about it, nobody faxed anybody about it -- so, clearly, it didn't happen."

NAME: Kit Carson

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Part of Immigrant Nightmare Goes on the Block

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 677 words


For Sale: Rusting 150-foot freighter. Name: Golden Venture. Last Voyage: To New
York City from Southeast Asia, with 300 illegal immigrants from China aboard.
Price: $17,500 or best bid. Prospects for future trips: Uncertain.

Interested buyers have been invited to take a look at the Golden Venture,
currently docked on Staten Island, where she is in the custody of Federal
Marshals who seized the vessel after it ran aground off Queens before dawn on
June 6.

The ship's spectacular arrival, and the death of 10 of her passengers in their
frantic effort to swim ashore, came to symbolize the plight of thousands of
other immigrants who risked their lives on similar ships, many of questionable
seaworthiness.

But now the Golden Venture is just another aging ship, and the United States
Marshals Service -- which sometimes make use of the cars and trucks they
confiscate -- would like to be rid of it. It has asked that bids be submitted in
writing by next Monday, and that prospective buyers be ready to deliver the full
amount of their offer by Aug. 20.

However, defense lawyers for the ship's captain and crew, who have been charged
with smuggling illegal aliens, have petitioned Judge Reena Raggi of Federal
District Court in Brooklyn to delay the sale until after their trial, currently
scheduled for October, arguing that the ship may be needed as evidence.

The judge decided last Friday that the ship must be held until she rules that it
can be released, said Assistant United States Attorney Steve Abrams.

But that has not stopped the Marshals Service from proceeding with plans for the
sale. It ran classified advertisements in newspapers on Sunday seeking bids, and
arranged viewings for this morning.

"It's for sale now," Deputy Marshal Craig Donlan said yesterday, "There may be a
delay, but it's definitely going forward."

Marshal Donlan said that several prospective bidders called to express interest
yesterday, but declined further comment. He also would not describe the present
condition of the ship, saying only that it would be up to prospective buyers to
decide whether she could be used for anything other than scrap.

The Golden Venture, used as a coastal freighter carrying dry goods along the
coast of Southeast Asia between Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam before she set
out on the five-month journey that would make it infamous, is apparently in poor
condition. In statements to investigators, crew members said that its engine
broke down repeatedly during the voyage, and that during one storm they wondered
if the ship would sink.

Lawyers for the captain and crew who visited the ship last month described its
conditions as appalling, with tiny, bunk-sized cabins for the crew, and an open
hold below deck where the 300 passengers were crammed, with a single toilet for
all of them.

One of the lawyers, Joel R. Weiss, said he planned to ask that the jury be taken
to see the conditions on the ship, which he said was the reason he petitioned
Judge Raggi to block its immediate release. Mr. Weiss, who represents the ship's
chief officer, San Lwin, said he thought seeing the ship with their own eyes
would help persuade jurors that the crew members did not expect to carry human
cargo when they set out.

The advertisement, which appeared in The New York Times and other newspapers,
said that the Marshals Service had already received an unsolicited offer of
$17,500 from a bidder, whom Marshal Donlan would not identify. Other bidders
were invited to offer bids of 10 percent higher -- $19,250 -- or more.

The advertisement specified that the ship's sale is on an "as is, where is,"
basis, meaning that the buyer will be expected to remove it in its current
condition.

The shipping agent who brokered the ship's sale a few weeks before its departure
said last month that he was surprised to hear that she had successfully made a
voyage across two oceans on its way to New York City. The ship was named the
Tong Sern before the words "Golden Venture" were painted on her hull at the
outset of its last voyage.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Clancy Sends His Agent On a Mission to the Past

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 878 words



Without Remorse
By Tom Clancy
639 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons.$24.95.

Take heavy helpings of Rambo and Col. Jim Braddock; mix with generous gobs of
Dirty Harry; flavor with "Death Wish," and you have John Kelly in "Without
Remorse." For those who have not been paying attention, Tom Clancy's busy hero,
a k a Mr. Clark of the Central Intelligence Agency, targeted nuclear terrorists
in "The Sum of All Fears," busted Colombian drug dealers in "Clear and Present
Danger" and spooked the K.G.B. in "The Cardinal of the Kremlin."

By setting his new odds-on best seller in the early 1970's, Mr. Clancy spares
Kelly the problems of aging or doing his stuff without a Commie adversary. The
Vietnam War is on, and American pilots have been captured by the North
Vietnamese. Washington needs Kelly to get them out.

Naturally, he is ready, but he is distracted by having to kill off a batch of
drug dealers, in vengeance for the vile indignities they have inflicted on the
young woman who, briefly, replaces Kelly's pregnant wife (dispatched in an
automobile accident on page 16) in his affections. If Kelly were the sort of man
who read Oscar Wilde, he would know that to lose one lover may be regarded as a
misfortune, but to lose both looks like carelessness.

What with brutal heroin merchants, vicious prison-camp commanders, the Mafia,
the K.G.B., a crooked police lieutenant, a Washington power broker who slips
information to the enemy and other bad guys and good ones to keep track of, you
might think that 639 pages would be hardly enough to make do. But as it turns
out, despite frequent bopping from place to place and from one set of
conspirators to another, the story is basically simple and will be familiar to
readers who follow this sort of thing.

So Mr. Clancy has to do a lot of padding to fill a page quota that can justify
the $24.95 price tag. He manages by pumping in his characteristic information on
this and that, particularly the care and operation of cars, cameras, boats and
guns: "First he depressed the stud and action spring. Next he swiveled the
bushing. That allowed the spring to go free. Kelly dismounted the slide
assembly, removing the barrel, and now the pistol was field-stripped."

You can also pick up hints on surgical procedures and the preparation of heroin.
Some of the information seems to come straight out of a manual, possibly
translated from the Korean: "Attendant to the machine were numerous hand tools
and gauges and drawers full of various steel blanks, just roughly machined metal
shapes intended for further manufacturing into whatever specific purpose a
technician might need."

The author's narrative technique owes something to the old magazine-writer
maxim: Tell them what you're going to tell them; tell it; tell them what you've
told them. The dialogue is never elliptical, in, say, the le Carre manner.
Everything that anybody might want to know is laid out explicitly and
repeatedly. Maybe Mr. Clancy has a short memory span or maybe he assumes that
his readers do not pay close attention between the action sequences. Either way,
he takes no chances; if you hear a criminal's plan or a police officer's
deduction once, you'll hear it again. Our author is without remorse.

This chronic repetition does not add to the interest of the characters, the
Jewish doctors, the Irish cops and the Italian crooks who come right out of the
busy novelist's all-purpose plot programmer. Baseball-fan talk is used as a
distinguishing feature.

The writing has some zip when Kelly is killing off the baddies, but otherwise,
it just glitches along. A drug biggie reflects on "the magnitude of his supply,"
"the burgeoning reputation of his product" and his "shipment modality." With the
hero in a tight spot, Mr. Clancy reports, "Failure to get out before dawn would
materially degrade Kelly's chances of ever escaping this country."

Here is Kelly scrutinizing pimps at work: "There was too much emphasis on their
interactive gestures, not the casual comfort that you saw among people whose
company was shared for some purpose other than money." The obviousness of
observation and the stiffness of language are hallmarks of the Clancy style.
When he reaches for imagery, he seems to be quoting or misquoting: "She'd seen
the darkness, and finding the light, she had to extend its glow to others."

As for Kelly, he turns out to be one of those pious sadists who really hate
having to go around executing villains but keep assuring themselves that
somebody has to do it. Fans can take consolation from the piety even as they get
a charge out of the sadism. "Where was right?" Kelly reflects in a descent into
philosophy. "Where was wrong? Where was the line between them?" Not to worry;
his pistol is field-stripped.

Mr. Clancy plays defense lawyer for his hero: "Kelly's flaw . . . he loved too
much, cared too much, invested too much in the things and the people who touched
his life. He could not turn away. Though it might save his life, to turn away
would inevitably poison it. And so he had to take his chances and see things
through."

The nice people in "Without Remorse" and presumably Mr. Clancy's many readers
see things Kelly's way. Others may find 639 pages of flapdoodle materially
degrading.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Clancy (Sally Soames/G. P. Putnam's Sons)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SCIENTIST AT WORK: Victoria Elizabeth Foe;
Drawing Big Lessons From Fly Embryology

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2222 words


VICTORIA ELIZABETH FOE seems to have the wrong voice for the rest of her. On the
telephone she sounds small and timid, like a character from a moody novella who
sits by herself at a corner table, sipping tea and dispassionately reviewing the
minor disappointments of her life.

But in person, when she lets loose and starts talking about her work as a
developmental biologist who spends days upon nights peering into a microscope,
observing the earliest moments of embryonic life and charting every throb and
tremble of every individual cell, she expands to epic dimensions and
superlatives fly.

"There's a deliciousness and a delight to looking at embryos," she said.  "It's
a celebratory act, an act of enormous pleasure."

Later she said: "It's like a diver going down into the sea. You notice something
new and something totally amazing every single time. It's just a wonderland."

Still later she said: "This is biology's golden age. It's analogous to cathedral
building of a thousand years ago. We are building and building this great
edifice. Some of us are building arches, some painting murals, some carving in
stone. I feel enormously privileged to be alive now and to be a part of it."

And the woman herself has so much flair and presence that everything else looks
stunted by comparison. She wears a long peasant skirt, a peasant blouse and
cowboy boots that surely lift her up to six feet tall. She has a wild spray of
long black hair and features that are at once delicate and strong.

Dr. Foe, 48, a research scientist at the University of Washington, is widely
celebrated among developmental biologists and drosophila geneticists, who study
the fruit fly for insight into how all animals grow. All her peers know her work
and cite it in papers of their own. They know she is the one who made the
seminal observation that very early in development, different groups of cells in
different regions of the formless embryo begin dividing at markedly different
rates, a discovery that casts light on how a monotonous bleb of tissue, to use
the biologists' term, gives rise to the complexity of body and brain. She is so
highly regarded that the National Institutes of Health gives her a supporting
grant that is independent of any affiliation with a university or institution,
the only such grant it awards. Dr. Foe has also just received a five-year
MacArthur fellowship, the so-called genius award that comes with no strings
beyond the expectation of continued brilliance.

She is a woman who has forged a novel path for herself in science. Most other
biologists either work in academia, trudging down the track to tenure and
gathering ever more graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and technicians
along the way, or they take jobs in industry for steady salaries.

Dr. Foe has done neither. She has never sought a professorship because she did
not want her life to be consumed by administrative duties that would take her
away from her research. She would never want to work for a company, out of a
dislike of being bossed. She has never had technicians or students working for
her, although she may accept a graduate student this fall. Her grant from the
N.I.H. supplies her salary and money for equipment and biological materials,
which means that her arrangement with the University of Washington is relatively
loose. In essence she is a self-employed scientist, and what she has done she
has done largely on her own, as Foe Inc., a one-woman band.

"She's a very unusual character, and she has had a strong impact," said Dr.
Claude Desplan, a fruit fly geneticist at Rockefeller University in New York.
"But her style is fundamentally different from the way most science is done
today."

Yet in her tremulous telephone voice is a telling clue to her character. Despite
her accomplishments, the courage of her unorthodoxy, and her conviction that the
work she is doing is grand and profound, Dr. Foe, say those closest to her, has
all the ego strength of a teen-age girl at her first sock hop. She gets nervous
easily. She is always afraid that her grant will run out and will not be
renewed.  She works maniacal hours and then worries that she has not done
enough, or is wrong or obtuse or muddled in her thinking. She considers herself
a dull and inept speaker, although everybody who hears her talk is enraptured.

"On the one hand she has an unbending iron core and she absolutely knows what
she is doing is the right thing to do," said Dr. Garrett M. Odell, a
developmental biologist at the University of Washington. "But that is coupled
with this amazingly persistent insecurity about whether she is good enough to be
talking to smart people. Even now, she's worried that the MacArthur people are
going to call her back and say, 'Are you VICTORIA Foe? Oh, sorry, we meant
VICTOR.' " Dr. Odell has recently become Dr. Foe's collaborator and her live-in
mate, although that usually means living in at the lab.

Pondering the Whole

The mix of fear and fortitude is only one of many contradictions that Dr. Foe
embodies. In an era when most basic biologists take a reductionist approach to
their craft, breaking down a problem into its smallest possible component, Dr.
Foe is more like an old-fashioned naturalist who observes the nuances of the
entire organism as it goes about the business of growing. She looks at embryos
of fruit flies, blowflies, mosquitoes, frogs, hornworms, fish; dusk will cede to
dark, the dark to dawn, and still she will keep looking. Yet far from being an
imprecise empiricist, she swiftly adopts new technologies and uses molecular
biology to make her observational work ever keener.

"I use increasingly 20th-century techniques for a 19th-century approach, where I
spend hours just looking," she said. The technology is now taking on a
21st-century flavor, as she and Dr. Odell hook up her observational microscope
to computers and controls that will allow Dr. Foe to mark individual cells of a
fly embryo and follow them through the entire odyssey from their initial
emergence in the blob-like blastula to their final destiny as constituents of
antennae, foot, thorax or eye. The enterprise is expected to take about two
years, and the cellular atlas that will result will be the most detailed record
ever produced of embryonic growth, far outstripping in complexity the famed fate
map that scientists have made of the much more primitive laboratory roundworm.

Dr. Foe, as well as the many other fruit fly geneticists who avidly await the
production of her master atlas, will then be able to use the blow-by-blow
descriptions of cell fate to determine which genes control the behavior of cells
as they mature. And for scientists, it is an article of faith that finding the
genes behind the growth of fruit fly larvae will hasten the discovery of the
equivalent developmental genes in humans.

"There are probably 10,000 people working on drosophila today, and what Victoria
is doing is incredibly useful for most of them," said Dr. Bruce M. Alberts, the
new president of the National Academy of Sciences who was Dr. Foe's postdoctoral
adviser at the University of California at San Francisco.

Dr. Odell said: "Her approach takes the sort of patience that almost nobody has
anymore. She's monastic."

The Art of Science

The observational approach also suits Dr. Foe's esthetic sensibility.  "There
are always roads you didn't take, other paths that beckon, and for me the other
road was art," Dr. Foe said. "If you look at my science, it's extremely visual."
She makes detailed drawings of what she sees, and her finely delineated and
brilliantly colored diagrams of fruit fly embryos are so exacting and sensual
that it is a pity they are confined to scientific journals.

Dr. Foe is also a perfectionist.  While other scientists rush to put out as many
publications in as brief a period as possible, Dr. Foe will work for years on a
project, not reporting her results until she is satisfied that the findings are
solid and complete.  As a result, her curriculum vitae is shorter than that of
many scientists her age, but most papers listed are more like books than
reports. In publishing one of her exhaustive papers, the journal Development
warned other would-be authors not to take similar liberties in length unless
they were prepared to match her rigor and breadth of research.

Yet here is another contradiction.  Dr. Foe is a scientific loner, but she has a
strong political conscience. One reason she never sought a tenure-track position
in science was to give her the freedom to switch gears quickly when she wanted
to pursue political activities.

As a graduate student at the University of Texas at Austin, she dropped out for
a year and a half to work as a political aide and help overturn the state's
anti-abortion law. She was involved in the women's movement and the anti-Vietnam
War movement. More recently, she and Dr. Odell rallied vigorously against the
Persian Gulf war, and this week they are planning to go to Canada, where Dr. Foe
has a plot of land, to protest the Government's plan to allow logging in an
old-growth forest.

"Most scientists try to ignore the rest of the world, but she has a tremendous
guilt complex," Dr. Alberts said. "She feels guilty about doing science all the
time and allowing people to starve or go to war."

Political Lesson

Even in her science Dr. Foe finds a political lesson. "The wonderful lesson to
come out of biology in the last five years is the same genes, the same parts,
turn up again and again, from one species to another," she said. "The important
lesson to realize is that we're all made of the same fabric, we're part of the
same web, and there is some humility in the idea that is appropriate."

Dr. Foe came by her capacious perspective in childhood, as her family moved from
Wyoming to Mexico to England and eventually back to the United States, her
father changing careers from law to farming to teaching. "One of the things I
got from living abroad was a larger world view," she said.

Her father was a shining knight in her life. He was fascinated by everything,
she said, and he stimulated the same intellectual hunger in his three children.
He died of congestive heart failure when she was 21, and Dr. Foe still feels
deep sorrow that he did not live long enough to see what she has discovered as a
diver into microscopic realms. "It would have absolutely delighted him," she
said. "It would have completely interested him. He put up with our larval states
and then didn't get to enjoy us as human beings."

Dr. Foe's unconventional scientific career can be traced to her marriage to Dr.
Michael Dennis, a neurophysiologist at the University of California.  When her
husband decided to quit science and become a sculptor, Dr. Foe, then a
postdoctoral student, decided to leave California with him and his daughter and
move up to Denman Island in Canada. Horrified that Dr. Foe, too, might leave
science, her adviser, Dr. Alberts, helped her arrange to work out of Friday
Harbor Laboratories in Washington, a spectacularly beautiful research station
not far from the Canadian island. "I thought it would be an incredible waste if
she went up there and did pottery or something," Dr. Alberts said.

Dr. Foe completed her postdoctoral training at Friday Harbor, and then, in the
mid-1980's, persuaded the N.I.H. to give her the independent grant she still
receives today.

Dr. Foe and Dr. Dennis have since divorced, although she continues to see him
and his daughter and is now building a one-room cabin for herself on Denman
Island.

A Break in Synchrony

Her talents have not been squandered. In the findings that made her reputation,
Dr. Foe discovered in the late 1980's that early in the development of an
embryo, a spectacular transition occurs. While all the cells of the embryo grow
in unison through the first 13 rounds of division, splitting in half and in half
again as a single pulsating bundle, the synchrony breaks down at the 14th
division. At that point, different groups of cells begin dividing at markedly
different rates. These various arenas of division are called mitotic domains,
after mitosis, or cell division, and there are 25 of them in the early fly
embryo, with clear boundaries between one domain and the next.

These domains are previews of coming attractions, the first visible signs of
cell specialization that eventually will yield distinct organs. Much further
down the line in embryonic growth, one domain will give rise to the nervous
system, and another the creature's limbs.

"It gives us a completely unexpected window on cell determination," Dr. Foe
said. "It looks like the embryo has virtually painted on it its own fate."

Yet even with this window, scientists cannot say exactly how the domains give
rise to body components.  "We have a rough fate map, but we don't know any of
the little territories in detail," she said. "We may know this domain is in an
area that gives rise to the nervous system, but we don't have a clue to which
component of the nervous system it makes."

Gathering those details will consume the next phase of her career, as she traces
the lives of individual cells within the different mitotic domains -- monastic,
often alone, but delighting in the spectacle unfolding before her.

NAME: Victoria Elizabeth Foe

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Victoria Elizabeth Foe, developmental biologist at the
University of Washington, Seattle. She says, "This is biology's golden age."
(Doug Wilson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Use Vietnam's Agent Orange Data

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


To the Editor:

The Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences concludes that
statistical evidence links Hodgkin's disease and porphyria cutanea tarda with
Agent Orange and other herbicides (news article, July 28). It thus adds these
two ailments to a list of herbicide-associated diseases including chloracne,
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and soft tissue sarcoma.

As in previous studies, the statistical evidence does not prove that the
chemicals caused the diseases, only that a link is likely. The report recommends
that a new civilian committee attempt to estimate herbicide dosage to service
personnel by "historical reconstruction" based on military records of spray
operations.

There may be a better way to settle remaining questions. Why not use data
gathered by the Vietnamese themselves? Scientists like Dr. Ton That Tung of the
Viet Duc Hospital (now deceased) have chronicled abnormal medical occurrences
following aerial spraying and have compared the frequencies of observed
abnormalities among villages experiencing different exposure.

Ecological data from the same regions have also been gathered. This should allow
our statistical researchers to come to more definite conclusions about effects
on human males.

Also, information on fetal malformation should provide important data on
pregnant women to compare with animal laboratory data establishing the
teratogenic effects of samples of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, Agent Orange's herbicidal
components.

This Vietnamese evidence has been available for years, much of it presented at
well-attended international conferences and some of it published. Why have our
investigators never used it in their analyses? Has the lack of diplomatic
relations between our two countries been an impediment? The international nature
of science and improved contacts between the United States and Vietnam now
compel an examination of all relevant data.

ARTHUR W. GALSTON
New Haven, Aug. 1, 1993

The writer retired as Eaton Professor of Biology, Yale University.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

After Her Pivotal 'Yes' on Budget, Now the Fallout

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: WYNDMOOR, Pa., Aug. 10


A vision of the future stared back at Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky from a table
at Nick's Pizzeria the other day, and it did not appear altogether happy.

This was her first foray back home since her name became more than a mouthful
Thursday night in Washington. She had changed her mind at the last minute and
cast the vote that insured passage of President Clinton's economic package in
the House, a stunning move for a freshman Democrat from a district in which
Republicans outnumber Democrats almost 2 to 1.

Jay Moore, a 47-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War, not much of a fan of
politicians to begin with, was slightly bemused to find himself in the same
restaurant with the woman who represents him in Congress from the suburbs
northwest of Philadelphia in Montgomery County.

Visions of Deceit

"They're all deceitful," he said before Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky made her way
across the room to shake hands and try to make sense of her date with history.

It was quite a story. Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky had widely proclaimed her
opposition to the bill for not going far enough to cut spending and deal with
the costs of social programs, and that is what she told anyone who asked:
Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader who inquired the day before;
party whips, as they leaned on House members all day Thursday; even Deputy
Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman, who called about an hour before the vote.

But as she had in voting for the House version of the bill in May, she waited
until the end of the balloting in case her vote was crucial. This is not
uncommon for undecided members or those from difficult districts. Routinely,
party leaders ask them to delay voting, as they had of Pat Williams of Montana,
Ray Thornton of Arkansas and David Minge of Minnesota. If their votes are then
not needed, they are free to vote as they choose. If the votes are necessary,
they are asked to consider the party first.

This time the party needed her, and as a result, she voted with the President --
but not before extracting a fig leaf or two to respond to critics for her
11th-hour reversal. At the least, she won assurance from the President of a
conference in her district on the deficit in which Mr. Clinton and several
Cabinet members would participate.

'Window of Opportunity'

It was a political gamble -- she readily acknowledged that -- but also a chance
to make a difference by adding a new voice to the mix. "A window of
opportunity," she called it today during a visit to the Green Acres senior
center here, where she found people more supportive than those at Nick's in
Norristown. "I wasn't going to do it at 217. I wasn't going to do it at 219.
Only at 218, or I was voting against it."

Predictably, in a region where people debate politics as passionately as the
Phillies and the Eagles, reaction was swift and intense. In Montgomery County
and beyond, Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky has been judged a patriotic heroine by some
and a traitor by others.

But beyond labels and name-calling, she faces the larger question of political
survival. Last year, she became the first Democrat to represent the district
since 1916, defeating her Republican opponent, Jon D. Fox, by only 1,373 of
257,510 votes cast in a campaign in which she accused him of reversing his
position on abortion rights. Yet she acknowledged that any chance for
re-election might hinge less on sentiments of the moment than the willingness of
angry constituents like Mr. Moore and other diners at Nick's to accept her
explanation of why she changed her mind.

"Look, I have a terrible time not telling the truth," Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky
said. "My staying there is not the issue. I don't possess that job. That job
does not possess me. I'm not there to be popular. I'm there to do what's right.
I will explain it; I just hope I have the time."

What is right, she has insisted since the vote, was seizing a chance to push a
discussion of automatic-spending programs into the forefront of national debate,
to make Social Security, welfare, Medicare and Medicaid more fair and efficient
and a smaller piece of the budget. Entitlement programs, as they are known, now
account for more than a third of the Federal budget.

To her detractors, voting for a bill to raise taxes was egregious enough.
Changing her mind made it worse. Never mind the conference on entitlements, as
many of them have said. She knows they are the ones she needs to persuade, but
for now, it is unclear whether they can be or, because of their anger, want to
be.

"I don't believe in people with two faces," Tom Borai, 59, a worker at a local
tool company, said while Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky was eating lunch in another
room at Nick's. "She stated she was not for it. Then after 15 minutes with Mr.
Clinton she changed her mind. I do know that bothered a lot of people in this
county, and I think it will hurt her in the next election."

Prospects for Re-election

Sitting nearby, Ralph Herge, a 37-year-old landscaper who said he had voted for
Mr. Fox, called her "a sellout" for relinquishing her position. Yet he applauded
her explanation and predicted that alone might soften the damage in a
re-election campaign.

"What she did, by telling us exactly what happened, seems to make sense," Mr.
Herge said. "It may not hurt her if more of Clinton's stuff works. But if it all
falls apart, then it will."

Mr. Moore, who was reared in South, said he had voted for Mr. Clinton only as a
matter of loyalty to a fellow Southerner. But he said he had not cast a vote in
the House race because of a general distrust of politicians who might raise
taxes. That was why he continued to express skepticism, even after receiving
assurances from Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky that she would help him if he ran into
problems collecting veteran's benefits.

"She said she didn't think it was a good piece of legislation but she still
voted for it," he said. "If it wasn't good, why did she vote for it? She said if
she didn't, we'd still be in gridlock. But it doesn't make sense to me."

Still, Mr. Moore was satisfied enough with her sincerity to be "a little
open-minded" about voting for her next year.

Not unexpectedly, Republican leaders in the district have vilified Ms.
Margolies-Mezvinsky, gleefully predicting that she had severely damaged her
chances for re-election next year. Christopher J. Bravacos, executive director
of the Republican State Committee, assessing the effect of Ms.
Margolies-Mezvinsky's vote, said, "It's premature to say it's suicide, but maybe
Dr. Kevorkian is lurking." He was referring to Dr. Jack Kevorkian, the retired
pathologists who has assisted people in committing suicide.

Mr. Fox, her vanquished opponent and one of three Montgomery County
Commissioners, said: "She pretends to be a Republican and a reformer and a
fiscal conservative. But the facts are, she's a typical tax-and-spend Democrat.
She has lied to the taxpayer. Now, she's an insider career politician."

Democrats Assess Damage

While Democrats have rallied to her side, applauding her courage, they at least
acknowledge difficulties ahead.

"I'm sure her vote has done some damage," said Colleen S. Alexander,
co-chairwoman of the county Democratic committee. "I don't think a lot of people
really understand the difficulties involved with cutting entitlements. But by
the time this all plays out, I think she'll be able to educate people, and maybe
turn some of them around."

Edith Greenberg, the 70-year-old wife of Phil Greenberg, a resident of Green
Acres, is among those already convinced.

"I'm scared and frightened," she told Ms. Margolies-Mezvinsky. "I could live
another 14 years, but how will I live? I might have to get a job. But it took a
lot of courage for you to change your mind. Even if it costs me more, you were
honest enough to say the plan was no good. Why do we want that? But things have
to change, and I appreciate what you're doing."


NAME: Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Marjorie Margolies-Mezvinsky made her first foray
back home in suburban Philadelphia since she changed her mind and cast the vote
that insured House passage of President Clinton's budget plan. She explained her
decision to Jay Moore, a Vietnam War veteran, at a local pizzeria. (Bill Cramer
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

James H. Ahmann, 62, Pilot and Air Force General

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 395 words


Lieut. Gen. James H. Ahmann of the Air Force, a highly decorated Vietnam War
pilot who helped plan military fighter planes, died at his home in Vienna, Va.,
on Sunday. He was 62.

He died of cancer, his family said.

As a combat pilot he flew 230 missions in Vietnam in the early 1960's and on a
second tour of duty in 1969-70. He also served with the Seventh Air Force
Tactical Air Control Center in Vietnam as chief of current operations and plans.
In that role he helped plan the A-10 attack plane and the F-15 Eagle fighter
plane.

General Ahmann graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point
in 1954 and from the Air Command and Staff College in 1966. He also earned a
master degree's in electrical engineering at the Air Force Institute of
Technology.

Wing Commander in Europe

From 1960 to 1962 he was a range development officer in the lunar landing
program at Cape Canaveral, Fla.. He was later transferred to the Air Force
headquarters in 1970 and served as chief of the tactical support division, chief
of the fighter division and deputy director for general purpose and airlift
studies.

Later, General Ahmann was commander of the 52d Tactical Fighter Wing in West
Germany, the 20th Tactical Fighter Wing in England and the Eastern Test Range at
Patrick Air Force Base in Florida, where he also served as the Department of
Defense manager of support operations for manned space flights.

General Ahmann was also chief of the United States Military Training Mission in
Saudi Arabia and director of plans at the Air Force headquarters in the
Pentagon.

After retiring in 1982 as director of the Defense Department's Security
Assistance Agency, he worked for the Northrop Corporation and the General
Dynamics Corporation.

Among the military decorations he received were the Distinguished Service Medal,
the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with
two oak leaf clusters, the Bronze Star and the Meritorious Service Medal with
oak leaf cluster.

General Ahmann's first marriage ended in divorce.

Surviving are his wife of 26 years, the former Jean Godbey; a son, Second Lieut.
Luke Ahmann, stationed at Hanscom Air Force Base, Mass.; three daughters, Lisa
Wood of Little Rock, Ark., and Carolyn and Nora Ahmann, both of Vienna; a
sister, Katherine Eicher of Milton, Fla., and a grandchild.

NAME: James H. Ahmann

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Of Islam, Fundamentalism and Western Values

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 895 words



The New Cold War?
Religious Nationalism Confronts the Secular State
By Mark Juergensmeyer
292 pages. University of California Press. $25.

Islam and the West
By Bernard Lewis
217 pages. Oxford University Press. $25.

From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, the cold war is over. If
so, what's all the shooting about in warring corners of the world?

In "The New Cold War?," Prof. Mark Juergensmeyer of the University of Hawaii
says the clash between Communism and the West has been replaced by the threat of
religious warfare. Happily, the author places a question mark at the end of his
title, leaving a modicum of hope that conflicts can be resolved even in lands
where warrior-ruled theocracies now exist.

In "Islam and the West," Prof. Bernard Lewis of Princeton University offers a
rich account of the relationship between Europe and its Islamic neighbors. He
notes that only one Muslim country, Turkey, has formally adopted the separation
of religion and state as law. And he raises the possibility of religious
coexistence among Muslims, Christians and Jews even where fundamentalism is on
the rise.

Both authors provide perspective from the pages of history, though at times
their explanations are overpowered by today's headlines about deadly warfare
among fanatics. History is small consolation for the bombings and
self-destruction by cults, for the price on the head of Salman Rushdie and for
the imprisonment of writers and artists whose work is considered sacrilegious.


Regrettably, what sounds reasonable in both books often seems like whistling in
the dark. If not solutions, a reader hopes for more specific opinions from
scholars, even if this means that they go out on a limb and condemn the
religious authoritarians who destroy civilized order in their own countries and,
through their bomb-throwing emissaries, elsewhere in the world.

People who believe in the separation of church and state seek answers about
theocratic governments, past and present. Reinhold Niebuhr was deeply concerned
that religious illusions could encourage terrible fanaticism, and he has been
proved right. Mr. Juergensmeyer wonders: "Is it possible that Niebuhr's dark
vision may come to pass, and reason and religion will war with one another on a
nationalistic plane?"

In "The New Cold War?," Mr.  Juergensmeyer describes religious fundamentalism
around the world. In the most original sections of his book, he includes
interviews with religious leaders and public officials from the Middle East to
South Asia, from former Marxist states to the Far East.  One of his major points
is that religious fundamentalism can be better understood, and perhaps
tolerated, if it is recognized as religious nationalism.

He challenges Francis Fukuyama, who asserts in his book "The End of History and
the Last Man" that the end of the cold war has led to a worldwide ideological
consensus in favor of secular liberal democracy.  Mr. Juergensmeyer says that
the rise of new religious and ethnic nationalism and continuing regional wars
have upset Mr. Fukuyama's theory.

The good news is that Mr. Juergensmeyer believes that religious nationalists are
incapable of uniting. He sees the possibility of a grudging tolerance developing
between religious and secular nationalists. Instead of a new cold war, he
concludes, each might be able to admire what the other provides: "Communitarian
values and moral vision on the one hand, individualism and rational rules of
justice on the other."


In "Islam and the West," Mr. Lewis contrasts the Christian and Islamic
civilizations and explains their interaction in war and peace, commerce and
culture. Defining his aims, he writes, "In this study I have tried to look at
the issue not in a Western but rather in an Islamic context, against the
background of Islamic history and law."

He points out that there is no unified Islamic position among the Muslim
countries. The Iraq-Iran war revealed similarities as well as differences
between their aims and propaganda. The Iranians presented the struggle in
religious terms; their adversary was never described as Arab and rarely even as
Iraqi. The Iranians preferred to see themselves as defenders of Islam against a
regime of apostates and renegades. As that war progressed, the Iraqi leaders
began to make more use of religious themes but without renouncing their
nationalistic and radical theology.

"In one Muslim country after another, radical, popular movements of the kind
commonly if inaccurately called fundamentalist have won mass support," Mr. Lewis
writes. "In some, as in Egypt and Jordan, they are kept under uneasy restraint.
In others, as in Algeria, they have been ruthlessly repressed. In two, Iran and
Sudan, they have won power. Like their royal and national predecessors, they
will be judged by what they do and fail to do."

Such distinctions are seldom recognized when we read about Muslim
fundamentalists -- or nationalists -- as a monolithic religious force.
Similarly, little attention was paid by the United States to the significance of
the various religious sects in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. At that
time, lack of knowledge proved costly.

"Islam and the West" is a primer for greater understanding of the countries
engaged in cold and hot wars that, directly or indirectly, are rooted in
religion.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mark Juergensmeyer (University of California Press); Bernard
Lewis (Robert Matthews/Oxford University Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NATO COMMANDER IS PICKED TO LEAD THE JOINT CHIEFS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


President Clinton today picked Gen. John Shalikashvili, the current NATO
commander and a critic of early Western inaction on Bosnia, to be the next
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

If confirmed by the Senate as expected, the Polish-born artillery officer would
succeed Gen. Colin L. Powell as the armed forces' top officer and the senior
adviser to the White House on military affairs. General Powell retires at the
end of September.

General Shalikashvili is a seasoned officer with a sophisticated understanding
of the European political landscape. As the head of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, General Shalikashvili (pronounced shah-lee-kosh-VEE-lee) has
argued that Washington needs to play a strong leadership role in the Western
alliance and has also worked to refine NATO's role following the end of the cold
war.

'Proven Warrior'

In a Rose Garden ceremony at the White House, President Clinton described the
general as "a soldier's soldier, a proven warrior, a creative and flexible
visionary." General Shalikashvili, who saw war as a boy in Eastern Europe, will
be the first foreign-born Chairman. [Man in the News, page A22.]

Noting that the general is known to his friends as "General Shali," Mr. Clinton
said, "I think I'll just start using the shortened version of his name."

Mr. Clinton's announcement culminates a search that had provoked months of quiet
jockeying among the military's top brass. Last week, Defense Secretary Les Aspin
gave Mr. Clinton a list with two finalists on it: Generals Shalikashvili and
Joseph P. Hoar, the Marine general who commands the United States Central
Command. One Pentagon official said the NATO commander was Mr. Aspin's first
choice.

On Wednesday night, Mr. Clinton dined at the White House with the military's top
16 commanders, several of whom presumably sat down to eat thinking they were
still in the running.

Entered Army as Draftee

Mr. Aspin said that by the time of the dinner, "I felt I could make a
prediction" on whom Mr. Clinton was going to pick. But the Defense Secretary
added: "It was not locked in stone. It was not announced at the dinner."

The selection is important for the White House, which is facing difficult
decisions on the use of military force in Bosnia and Herzegovina and other
trouble spots, as well as wrenching debates on how to cut the shrinking armed
forces.

For a President with no military service and who avoided the draft in the
Vietnam War, Mr. Clinton also faced the political imperative of coming up with a
strong candidate to replace the charismatic General Powell.

While General Shalikashvili's selection was widely applauded, there were those
who argued against leaving the post in the hands of the Army and who pointed out
that General Hoar had valuable experience in dealing with Iraq and the festering
situation in Somalia.

General Shalikashvili, 57, entered the Army as a draftee in 1959 and began the
long climb to the top, serving in important overseas commands and occupying
crucial posts in Washington.

'Has a Lot of Credibility'

"He has spent lots of time getting his boots muddy," said one Army officer. "He
has more than a staff view of the world, but he also knows how Washington works
and has a lot of credibility with the allies."

The general won combat decorations in Vietnam. After a succession of field and
staff positions, he rose to become the commanding general of the Ninth Infantry
Division in Fort Lewis, Wash., in 1989.

He was later appointed deputy commander in chief of the United States Army in
Europe and was promoted in 1991 to be assistant to the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, a post that involved him in high-level decision-making in the
Bush Administration.

General Shalikashvili first came to the attention of the public following the
Persian Gulf war, when he earned high marks by commanding the humanitarian
relief effort to help the Kurds in northern Iraq. That mission was one of the
first tests of the ability of the American military to expand its role following
the dissipation of the Soviet military threat.

"He is a guy who lives out in the real world of change and has had some
pressure-packed assignments," a senior Pentagon official said.

As the NATO commander, he helped manage the military alliance during its still
uncertain transition following the end of the cold war.

That transition has included NATO's embrace of peacekeeping operations and its
decision last week to threaten air strikes in Bosnia, the first time that the
alliance has positioned itself to take military action that was not in defense
of its members.

In recent comments that provide a glimpse of his views on Bosnia, the most
pressing European security issue before the West, the general sharply criticized
the West's delay in taking on the Bosnia question.

'Too Much Overestimating'

"The United States did not lead on this operation from the very beginning, as it
did in previous crises," he said in a recent interview at his headquarters in
Mons, Belgium, in remarks that appeared directed at the Bush Administration.

General Shalikashvili also said the West tended to overestimate the Serbs'
military prowess.

"We are not fighting a first-rate, fully combat-capable outfit like we have been
preparing for I don't know how many years," he said. "Never underestimate the
mess and the nastiness you get into, but I think we've had too much
overestimating."

General Shalikashvili's recent comments on Bosnia are in contrast with the
cautious pronouncements of General Powell, who has publicly warned against
military intervention in the fighting in Bosnia. As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, General Powell has been in the main a conservative figure who argued
against a major restructuring of the military's roles and missions, argued
against accepting openly gay soldiers in the military, and initially argued
against military intervention to help defend the Bosnian Muslims and the Shiites
of Iraq.

However, General Shalikashvili's experience, as the NATO commander, in dealing
with the United States' allies has given him a firsthand appreciation of the
concerns of reluctant allies, who are afraid that military action could prompt
retaliation against their peacekeeping troops in Bosnia.

General's Politic Answers

Speaking with his trademark Polish accent in a joint appearance with Mr. Clinton
at the White House, General Shalikashvili took a diplomatic but firm tack on
Bosnia in his appearance before reporters after the announcement today.

"We can be most successful if we never have to use force," the general said,
expressing the hope that NATO's threat to launch air strikes would prompt the
Serbs to loosen their choke-hold on Sarajevo.

But the general stressed that if the Serbs failed to heed the alliance's warning
and if NATO must confront the question of using force, "the resolve is there to
do so."

On other questions, the general gave politic responses, applauding Mr. Clinton's
recent decision on allowing homosexuals in the military.

When he was asked how he felt about women in the military, General Shalikashvili
responded, "I feel great about women in the military."

Timing of Announcement

The timing of Mr. Clinton's announcement today caught many lower-ranking
officials by surprise. General Powell does not finish his tour until the end of
September, and it was thought that the President would not announce his choice
until after Labor Day.

Administration officials said that Mr. Aspin had worked hard to insure that
General Powell's successor would be chosen expeditiously. The intent was to have
Mr. Clinton appear decisive in naming his new Chairman and not engage in a long
period of circumspection and speculation.

By tradition, General Powell's successor should have been neither Generals
Shalikashvili nor Hoar. The post has generally been rotated among the Army, Air
Force and Navy. Army generals and Navy admirals had filled the job for 11 years,
so custom dictated that an Air Force general be appointed.

But Clinton Administration officials said they had decided early on not to be
bound by tradition and to make sure that the best man got the job, regardless of
which service that person represented.

In political terms, each of the finalists had his appeal for the Administration.

The choice of General Hoar would have given the Clinton Administration an
opportunity to break new ground by picking the first marine to be Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

But General Shalikashvili's biography reads like an Horatio Alger story, and Mr.
Clinton relished in retracing his life story, from being born in Warsaw to
learning English in Peoria, Ill., by watching John Wayne movies.

Referring to General Shalikashvili's background as the son of a Georgia military
officer, Mr. Clinton said, "That's the Georgia over there, not over here."


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: As Gen. John Shalikashvili was named Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, he was applauded by the current Chairman, Gen. Colin L. Powell.
(pg. A1); Gen. John Shalikashvili being congratulated yesterday by Vice
President Al Gore and Defense Secretary Les Aspin after being nominated as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Also at the announcement were President
Clinton and the current Chairman, Gen. Colin L. Powell. (Jose R. Lopez/The New
York Times)(pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News;
Four-Star Military Mind

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


Pray for peace but prepare for war, runs an old military motto. John Malchase
David Shalikashvili came into a world about to go to war. As an 8-year-old boy,
he fled for his life through a country ruined by war. He has been preparing for
war all his adult life.

General Shalikashvili, who was named by President Clinton yesterday to succeed
Gen. Colin L. Powell as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would be the
first foreign-born military leader to hold that post. He was born in Warsaw on
June 27, 1936, the grandson of a czarist general and the son of a military
officer from the Soviet republic of Georgia. His mother was Polish.

He and his family fled to Germany from Poland in 1944, running before the
westward advance of the Red Army to get out of harm's way. At 16, he came to the
United States like many another refugee, seeking a new life. He settled in
Peoria, Ill., a quin tessential Midwestern city, and perfected his English as a
teen-ager by watching John Wayne movies.

Finding Life in the Army

Drafted, the immigrant with the unpronounceable surname (it's
shah-lee-kosh-VEE-lee) found his new life in the Army. He was commissioned a
second lieutenant of artillery in 1959 after attending Officer Candidate School
at Fort Sill, Okla., and came up through the ranks, bouncing from base to base
-- Fort Leonard Wood, Mo.; Fort Chafee, Ark.; Fort Sill; Fort Bliss, Tex.

By the time he got to Vietnam, in 1968, he was a major, serving as a senior
district adviser to South Vietnamese forces. And after he received a master's
degree in international affairs from George Washington University in 1970, his
superiors came to realize that he was a man with a first-rate military mind, and
his career began to take off.

His Army friends, and they are many, say the general, known informally as Shali,
thinks deeply and clearly about the ways of the world, about the role of the
United States military after the cold war, and about the smash-and-grab politics
that is shattering lives in the former Soviet republics and in the Balkans.

He took command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces a year ago and
has led the alliance as it endlessly considers plans for air strikes in Bosnia.
He has spent most of 1993 trying to get a handle on what Secretary of State
Warren Christopher calls "the problem from hell," the conflict in the shattered
former Yugoslavia.

In the months to come, the 57-year-old four-star general will need the clearest
head and the coolest hand he can muster if he is confirmed by the Senate, as
expected.

General Shalikashvili commanded a highly unusual campaign, airlifting food to
Kurdish refugees in Iraq, after the Persian Gulf war in 1991. In that operation
he led an international force of American, British, Dutch, French, Italian and
Spanish soldiers that patrolled what amounted to a provisional state carved out
of Iraq for the Kurds.

In addition to these highly stimulating jobs, General Shalikashvili spent the
heart of his career, in the 15 years from the end of the Vietnam War to the
advent of the gulf war, doing a great deal of thinking about the strategy, the
plans and the policies of the United States Army.

Mr. Clinton knows many things from direct experience, but military affairs are
not among them. Yesterday, when the President hailed the man he selected as "a
soldier's soldier, a proven warrior," and praised him for his creativity, vision
and candor, he listed the three things he needs most from General Shalikashvili.

"He's highly regarded in the Pentagon, highly intelligent, a very bright and
talented thinker," said Tom McNaugher, a West Point graduate, Army veteran and
military analyst at the Brookings Institution in Washington.

"In a period where we're getting ourselves into real conflicts, a President who
has sort of a mixed record in terms of his own participation in the military has
to be careful to pick an independent chairman with plenty of operational
experience," Mr. McNaugher said. "If Clinton is going to send Americans in
harm's way, he needs a chairman who is seen as offering independent operational
judgments. He chose the right man."

Vital Ideas and Decisions

General Shalikashvili was considered by many Pentagon insiders to be a dark
horse in the race to succeed General Powell as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the
leaders who preside over the American military. General Shalikashvili did not
campaign for the post, which may have enhanced his candidacy in the President's
eyes.

The ideas that the general has, and the decisions they entail, may help to
prevent the total collapse of Western policy in the former Yugoslavia -- or help
the collapse become complete. General Shalikashvili is the first to concede that
that policy has failed thus far.

The crisis in Bosnia is "a lesson to all of us of the importance of America's
leadership" and of "the price we pay when it isn't there," he said several weeks
ago in an interview with four reporters at NATO headquarters in Brussels.

"The United States did not lead in this operation from the very beginning, as it
did in previous crises," he continued. "America's leadership was not there."

Gravity Mixed With Laughter

It was once said of President Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, Zbigniew
Brzezinski, that when he opened his mouth 900 years of Polish history came
rolling out. General Shalikashvili has some of that gravity.

But the general also has a reputation for laughing at the human comedy as much
as weeping over human folly. For example, a reporter at the White House asked
him yesterday if he would try to enlist the member states of the now-dissolved
Warsaw Pact into NATO, a task that would probably require the skills of
Machiavelli and Metternich combined.

"I have just been nominated for the position of Chairman, not President of the
United States," General Shalikashvili replied, with a light Polish air to his
voice. Laughter followed. Then the man chosen to be the new Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs and his Commander in Chief walked back into the White House.

Today, the general will have to start thinking again about war.

NAME: John Malchase David Shalikashvili

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Preparing to End Its Operation in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 10


With dozens of lives lost and billions of dollars spent in the cause of ending a
generation of suffering in Cambodia, the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation ever is preparing to shut down.

Virtually all of the 22,000 peacekeepers should be out of Cambodia by the end of
November, meeting the timetable established under the 1991 peace treaty that
brought them here. Many civilian workers have already left, and the first of the
soldiers to depart, a contingent of Tunisians, pulled out last week.

The withdrawal means that sometime soon, for the first time since Vietnam
invaded 15 years ago, the Governing of Cambodia should be entirely in the hands
of Cambodians.

The peacekeepers have organized the freest and fairest elections in this
nation's history, and have helped put in place an interim Government that
appears to reflect the will of most Cambodian voters. The United Nations has
also brought back more than 350,000 Cambodian refugees to a homeland that many
had not seen in a decade.

A Mixed Record, Some Say

While those are remarkable accomplishments, the record of the peacekeeping force
in Cambodia is judged as mixed by many here. It is a sign of the troubles of
peacekeeping operations in Somalia, Bosnia and Angola that the mission here is
being hailed by the United Nations as such a success.

Most important, the United Nations has failed to contain the threat posed by
Cambodia's largest rebel force, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas of the Khmer
Rouge. The Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of more than one million
Cambodians in the 1970's, were blamed for the deaths of at least 12 of the 65
United Nations workers who died in peacekeeping operations.

The Khmer Rouge are now promising to resume the civil war unless they are given
at least an advisory role in the Government selected in the May vote, which the
rebels boycotted and at one point threatened to sabotage.

For now the mood among Cambodia's political leaders is one of wary conciliation.


An Interim Arrangement

The nation's two major political parties have agreed for now on an interim
power-sharing arrangement under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
head of state and former monarch.

There are two "co-premiers" -- Prince Norodom Ranariddh, one of Prince
Sihanouk's sons and the head of the royalist opposition party that won the
elections, and Hun Sen, who was Prime Minister in the Vietnamese-installed
Government that was voted out of office in May. Although Mr. Hun Sen's party
came in second in the election, he and his colleagues may still retain decisive
power through their continued control over the military.

In remarks to the first meeting of the National Assembly, Yasushi Akashi, the
Japanese diplomat who leads the United Nations force, told the legislators that
it was "the unmistakable will of the Cambodian people to become the masters of
their own country."

Prince Sihanouk remains the nation's most popular political figure and its best
hope for national reconciliation, although many Cambodians -- and certainly many
diplomats and United Nations officials -- remain troubled by his eccentricity,
his fickleness and his willingness to make bargains with the Khmer Rouge.

The Prince's unusual judgment is reflected even in his summer vacation schedule.
Ignoring the pleas of Cambodians who urged him to remain in Cambodia in this
crucial period, the Prince left last month for China and North Korea -- he has
homes in both countries -- and is not expected back until at least
mid-September. He told friends that he had to leave after a family astrologer
warned that he might be assassinated if he remained in Cambodia through the
summer.

The Khmer Rouge were largely forgotten during the political maneuvering in the
weeks right after the election. But they have made their presence felt again
this summer through a series of violent incidents in the countryside, including
a train ambush in which 30 civilians were killed.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Raymond T. McKay, 68, Is Dead; Head of Maritime Officers Union

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


Raymond T. McKay, a founder of the American Maritime Officers union and its
president for the last 36 years, died on Monday at a hospital in Miami. Mr.
McKay, who lived in Bay Harbor Island, Fla., was 68.

He died of heart failure, a union announcement said.

The union has 5,000 members, including licensed engine, deck and radio officers.
They work in United States commercial and military charter shipping on
international as well as domestic routes, and on vessels ranging from tugboats
to passenger liners.

Mr. McKay, who was born in Manhattan, was a graduate of the Merchant Marine
Officers Candidate School.

His career got off to a perilous start in World War II, when he shipped out as
an engineer on a supply run to the Soviet Union. His maiden voyage, on the S.S.
Fairfield City, ended when the ship was torpedoed by a German submarine and sank
off Florida.

Allied With Seafarers Union

In 1949 he helped organize the maritime officers union, which was then called
the Brotherhood of Marine Engineers and allied with the Seafarers International
Union of North America, headed by Paul Hall. The union, which changed its name
last year, was previously known as District 2 of the Marine Engineer Beneficial
Association-Associated Maritime Officers.

"My office was the trunk of my car," Mr. McKay once said, recalling his early
days as a union leader. He moved up from a union representative to become a
director of the union's pension and welfare fund, and became president in 1957.
Two years later the union merged with several locals of the Marine Engineer
Beneficial Association and went through several other name and jurisdictional
changes.

Mr. McKay also served as vice president of the marine engineers union and as
president of the Greater South Florida Maritime Trades Council of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O., and was a delegate of the International Transport Workers
Federation.

Among the union benefits he won were fully paid health insurance, pension
entitlements after 20 years of work, college scholarships for the children of
the union's members and training and licensing programs for promotions.

When the Vietnam War put a strain on shipping, Mr. McKay developed training
programs to provide more officers. He also proposed establishing the ship
simulation training center that is now operating in Dania, Fla., where the union
has its headquarters. Union officials say it is the most advanced such center in
the world.

Surviving are his wife of nearly 50 years, the former Frances Kelly, who is
known as Dolly; three sons, Michael, of Sunrise, Fla., secretary-treasurer of
the maritime officers union, Thomas, of Orangeburg, N.Y., and Robert, of Park
Ridge, N.J., who is vice president of the union's deep sea division; a daughter,
Celia Ann Rebadow of Margate, Fla.; a brother, Donald, of Palm Coast, Fla., 15
grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.

NAME: Raymond T. McKay

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ridgway Privately Blamed MacArthur

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


To the Editor:

Matthew B. Ridgway not only saved us from disaster in Vietnam and repaired the
disaster in Korea, as Roger Hilsman notes (letter, Aug. 1), but he did so
without fanfare and, in the Korean war, without laying one word of blame where
it belonged: on the indolent and arrogant Gen. Douglas MacArthur.

Privately, however, General Ridgway expressed his feelings without restraint.
When I began my own book on MacArthur, he wrote me: "I think your planned
summing up of MacA is fine: 'that no one but a fool or a megalomaniac would have
ordered still another drive on the Yalu with the forces available.' "

Then, in 1981 he wrote me about what he found when he took over the Eighth Army
in Korea: "Thanks to Mac's handling of Eighth Army, it was starved for
ammunition, food, clothing, engineering supplies, etc."

But when I said correspondence containing these sentiments should be offered to
the Institute of Military History to clarify his own contributions, General
Ridgway replied that while our exchange had been "pretty blunt as well as
accurate," publication would "serve no good purpose."

These are a self-effacing hero's words. In his copy of MacArthur's
"Reminiscences," however, he has written next to MacArthur's assertion that he
had given the order to return to the offensive in Korea: "No such order was ever
issued." It had indeed already been issued by General Ridgway.

ROBERT SMITH
Lenox, Mass., Aug. 3, 1993
The writer was General Ridgway's collaborator on "The Korean War."

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Now It's Up to Big Farming to Cut Down Poisons in Our Food;
Police Hardship Pay

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 76 words


To the Editor:

Foreign Service Officers of the State Department, when assigned overseas to
posts of unusual danger -- for example, Vietnam, Lebanon, Somalia, the former
Yugoslavia -- are given a special monetary allowance. Might this system not be
used for New York City police officers, who might also be granted a special
stipend when they are assigned to precincts with the highest crime rates?

ERIC KOCHER
Douglaston, Queens, Aug. 2, 1993

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Capital Spotlight;
Anguished Words From Dead Clinton Aide Make Washington Think About Its Values

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


"I was not meant for the spotlight of public life in Washington. Here ruining
people is considered sport."

Those anguished words, written by the deputy White House counsel, Vincent W.
Foster Jr., shortly before he died in an apparent suicide, have echoed through
the capital for three days now. Since their publication, people who live and
work here have been asking obsessively: Is it really that savage? Is Washington
so different from other places? Is the pressure at the top levels of power in
this city so intolerable that suicides are inevitable?

Washington loves to trumpet its own significance. People here reveled, during
the cold war, in the phrase "Capital of the Free World." Toughness, or the
pretense of toughness, is counted a more valuable coin than wisdom.  Among those
in the upper echelons of power, as well as those who court them and write about
them, self-importance is an occupational disease.

Lives Warped by Work

For some, the hours are long and the demands are great. There is a tendency to
forgo the solace of family and friends, weekends and vacations off, sports and
cultural life. Many is the Washingtonian whose life is warped by work.

Perhaps because of Mr. Foster's death, President Clinton admonished his staff at
a party on Wednesday to "remember, if you're rested and happy and upbeat, you'll
also do a good job for the United States."

"It's been four years and then some," he said, since he and his family had taken
a holiday that lasted more than four days. "That is a dumb thing to do. So I'm
going to take a vacation and I hope you will."

But the pressure of responsibility is surely no greater on most officials in the
Federal Government than it is on a brain or a heart surgeon, on a policeman
chasing a murderer or on those who move millions, even billions of dollars
through the currency markets.  Surely failure in politics is no more humiliating
than the ouster in the last few years of chief executives from such huge
enterprises as General Motors, International Business Machines and Eastman
Kodak.

More Intense Spotlight

The spotlight does shine more intensely in Washington than it does in Wall
Street, in the boardroom or in the nation's universities, another place where
pressure can be intense. No doubt overzealous reporters sometimes shine it in
places where it is needlessly intrusive, hoping to illuminate an issue or
discover some act of official wrongdoing.

But with one exception, it shined seldom on Mr. Foster. The Wall Street Journal
wrote three harsh editorials about him, and they distressed him deeply; in the
note complaining about the "sport" of "ruining people," Mr. Foster said that
"the WSJ editors lie without consequence."

Other papers, however, scarcely mentioned him during his six months on the job.
The Washington Post, for example, carried his name six times, The Los Angeles
Times carried it four times and The New York Times carried it once. In almost
all cases, the mentions were minor elements in the articles.

There is another important way in which Washington is different. As Marlin
Fitzwater, the White House spokesman under President George Bush, noted the
other day, Washington's is a culture of confrontation -- confrontation and
sometimes full-scale combat between the Republicans and the Democrats, the White
House and Capitol Hill and not least the news media and the politicians.

But Mr. Foster received only modest criticism, except from The Journal, for
anything he did. Even the travel office scandal, which Republicans, some
Congressional Democrats and many newspapers saw as an abuse of power, was not
attributed to him. The opprobrium was directed at President Clinton; Hillary
Rodham Clinton; Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel, and William H.
Kennedy, a more junior member of the counsel's staff.

From the start, some officials in the Clinton Administration have complained
that they were being subjected to more intensive scrutiny than they deserved.
The President himself proved long ago that he can handle the rough-and-tumble of
national politics, most notably when he survived the furious onslaught during
the New Hampshire primary after a former nightclub singer said she had had an
affair with Mr. Clinton.

Unprepared Arkansans

Some of his aides are much more tender. A member of the Clinton cabinet, not an
Arkansan, said: "The people who came here from Little Rock expected Washington
to be a bigger version of that town, and a lot of them were totally unprepared
for what they found. Some have adapted; some have not."

Mr. Foster, an accomplished lawyer, found the transition difficult. The courtly
old Rose law firm, for which he, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Kennedy all worked, was
poor preparation for the White House. Prestigious though it is, it is only the
third or fourth biggest firm in the nation's 96th largest city.

It defies credibility to suggest that the Clinton Administration has taken
anything resembling the pounding from political opponents or from the news media
that other Administrations have endured. President Lyndon B. Johnson's term
after the 1964 election was crippled by the Vietnam war, after all, and
President Richard M. Nixon's second term was cut short by the Watergate scandal.

Jeb Stuart Magruder, an official of Mr. Nixon's re-election campaign who served
218 days in prison for his role in covering up the Watergate break-in, is now a
Presbyterian clergyman in Lexington, Ky. He said this week: "It's a tough town.
The pressure may be great in Washington, but as a minister, I deal with many
people who are severely depressed. I would not suggest that that happens only in
Washington."

Vulnerability to Depression

Although depression is a complex and only partly understood illness, most
psychiatrists say that some people have an inherent vulnerability to it that
most do not. At some point, an event or a series of events can send the
vulnerable person spinning into depression, and a suicide attempt can ensue if
the illness is not treated.

It was depression, brought on by what he considered unfair attacks, that led to
the suicide in 1949 of James V. Forrestal, the nation's first Secretary of
Defense, while he was under psychiatric observation at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
It was depression that caused Robert C. McFarlane, one of President Ronald
Reagan's national security advisers, to attempt suicide in 1987 after he was
implicated in the Iran-contra scandal. He survived and now works as a
consultant.

No one can know for sure what led Mr. Foster to take his life, as the police
have concluded that he did. His last letter sounded as if it had been written by
a deeply depressed man, though it seemed more like the draft of a resignation
letter than a suicide note. But it is impossible to know whether the complaints
he voiced were the only cause or even the main cause of his agitated state of
mind, let alone the cause of his apparent suicide.

Nor is depression always caused by objective factors. Often, according to
students of the illness, the victim believes that the situation worrying him is
much more dire than it is. For instance, Mr. Forrestal, an avid anti-Communist
and a foe of Israel, then a new state, believed he was being followed by
Zionists and Communists.

Even if it was the problems of the White House counsel's office that drove Mr.
Foster to act as he did, he, Mr. Forrestal and Mr. McFarlane were the
exceptions. In Washington as elsewhere, in the Clinton Administration as in
others, a vast majority of people endure the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune and press on with their lives as best they can.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Commerce Secretary Reported Under Investigation

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 284 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


A published report says the Federal Bureau of Investigation is examining an
accusation that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown agreed to accept a $700,000
payment from Vietnam in exchange for his help in lifting American trade
restrictions against Hanoi.

The report appears in the Aug. 23 issue of U.S. News & World Report, which says
that the inquiry has been under way since February but that it has never reached
the grand-jury stage and that Mr. Brown has not even been interviewed.

Traveling with President Clinton in California today, Mr. Brown said the
accusation was "totally without foundation."

"You have to ask the F.B.I.," he told reporters. "I assume that when someone
makes an absurd charge like this that someone would look into it. I welcome
that."

The Justice Department had no official comment on the matter, saying that as a
matter of policy it neither confirmed nor denied reports of ongoing criminal
investigations. But law-enforcement officials said, as they had in response to
previous questions about the accusation against Mr. Brown, that they had been
unable to substantiate it.

The magazine's account said Mr. Brown's accuser, identified as Ly Thanh Binh, a
Vietnamese business consultant in Florida, had told the authorities that a
former partner of his approached Mr. Brown in November 1992 to seek help in
lifting the trade embargo against Hanoi.

The magazine quoted Mr. Binh as saying his former partner, identified as Nguyen
Van Hao, had agreed to pay Mr. Brown in funds that would be transferred to a
bank account in Singapore. But, the article said, Mr. Binh's accusation has
gaps, including the fact that the bank account has not been located.



LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Chairman for Changing Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 574 words


For a Polish-born son of a Soviet Georgian military officer to succeed a
Bronx-born child of Jamaican immigrants as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
is a tribute to their abilities and to the military as a path for advancement in
America.

The tougher question is whether the nomination of Gen. John Shalikashvili to
replace Gen. Colin Powell is a tribute to President Clinton's judgment. That
will depend on whether General Shalikashvili can ease the military's adjustment
to a turbulent but less threatening world and its acceptance of social mores
that challenge tradition.

The choice of Chairman is critical to Mr. Clinton, who, like most Presidents and
members of Congress, never served in combat but who, more than most, has been
criticized for avoiding the draft.

The Chairman's job in its present form dates only to the Goldwater-Nichols
Reorganization Act of 1986, which set out to create a unified structure less
prone to inter-service rivalries.

Previously, the Joint Chiefs as a whole advised the President on military
matters. Goldwater-Nichols gave that role to the Chairman alone, and provided
him with additional resources to carry it out. To reinforce civilian control,
the Chairman was explicitly denied direct command authority over the armed
forces. In practice, the Chairman now serves as a broker among the service
chiefs and between them and the President.

For most of the life span of this new arrangement, the incumbent has been
General Powell, a man of enormous personal authority whose political instincts
were sharpened by his term as President Reagan's national security adviser.

General Shalikashvili has followed a more traditional path to military
leadership, having served as a staff officer in Vietnam, obtained a master's
degree in international affairs and progressed through a series of sensitive
commands, including the 1991 relief operation for Iraqi Kurds and his current
job as military commander of NATO.

One obvious priority for the new Chairman will be to introduce more flexibility
into the reigning strategic doctrine of overwhelming force. He appears less of a
true believer than General Powell, who reacted to Vietnam by becoming a fervent
advocate of massive superiority in warfare. On the surface that sounds like a
sensible way to insure against the risks of defeat. In practice it has often
meant overestimating the enemy's military prowess.

In its present form, the overwhelming-force doctrine has become the rationale
for larger-than-necessary military budgets and a skewed set of intervention
choices that seem driven more by favorable force ratios, as in Somalia, than by
national interest.

A more delicate but equally important task will be to snuff out the hints of
public disrespect toward the Commander in Chief that have surfaced from time to
time in the early months of President Clinton's term, especially on social
issues. After his disruptive open opposition to the President's plan to end
discrimination against homosexuals, General Powell has worked to snap refractory
commanders into line and provide an example of acceptance of civilian authority
over the military. But the job is not yet finished.

General Shalikashvili must see that the President gets, in private, the best
independent professional advice the military can offer, while making sure he
receives the full public respect and unconditional obedience the Constitution
commands.



LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENDPAPER/PUBLIC STAGES;
Stanley, I Presume

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 6; Page 66; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


Like everyone I knew in college in my freshman spring of 1968, I devoted too
many nights to meticulous, if stoned, frame-by-frame dissections of Stanley
Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey." We were miserable.  The Vietnam apocalypse
was now. Kubrick's Cinerama epic, with its recurrent image of a mysterious,
tombstone-shaped monolith, beckoning man through time and space to ever higher
planes of evolution, was a promise of peace and redemption. If only we could
survive to the next century we'd have all the answers.

I never could have imagined that 25 years later the Vietnam War would be over, I
would be a functioning adult, and that one very late July night I would meet
Stanley Kubrick in London.

The place was Joe Allen's restaurant, the American expatriates' after-theater
hangout in a cellar in Covent Garden. At my table sat two sharp reporters from
the newspaper where I work, women who have cornered subjects as diverse as the
President of the United States and David Hampton, the fabled Manhattan scam
artist who posed as Sidney Poitier's son.  With us was our friend Larry, the
producer, who knows everyone in Hollywood and has long since stopped being
impressed by any of them.

A table away four men seemed to be eavesdropping on us. One of them, sixtyish
and wearing the plaid sport jacket, tie and tinted glasses of a car salesman,
cocked his head so tautly in our direction his body threatened to spring to the
ceiling.

Finally he did get up, to leave. As his companions headed for the door, the man
hesitated a few seconds, then swiveled toward Larry.

"I don't like what your newspaper wrote about me," the stranger said in a
gravelly New York voice, startling us with his apparent knowledge of our
identities.

Larry laughed and said, "I don't think you want me."

The man seemed harmless, though sloshed, so the journalists at the table
introduced ourselves.

"I don't like what your paper wrote," he repeated. "I am not a recluse."

Who are you? we asked.

"Stanley Kubrick," he said. He cupped his hand around his chin. "I've shaved off
my beard."

One of the younger men who had been at the man's table abruptly appeared to
retrieve him. "I don't like being called creatively dormant, either," the man
protested before turning away.

But Stanley Kubrick is a recluse. The Bronx-born director of "Dr. Strangelove,"
"Lolita" and "A Clockwork Orange" has been little seen in public since "2001."
He rarely leaves his adopted home of England. We were not about to let Kubrick,
and a scoop, get away now.

"Sit down!" one of my friends ordered, grabbing the man's tie and yanking him
into a chair.

"I can't stay," the man insisted, but he was trapped. One of his companions, a
sweaty-faced young man with a fan's obsessive eyes and a stack of souvenir
T-shirts from the new Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, "Sunset Boulevard," sat down,
too, introducing himself as a playwright. A hustler in black, older and
muscle-bound, kept guard behind them menacingly, like a thuggish "droog" in "A
Clockwork Orange." The fourth man in their party, white-haired and bespectacled,
was said to be waiting impatiently in the car outside.

"You've seen 'Sunset Boulevard'?" we asked, desperate to keep our prey at the
table.

"She's terrific, but the rest of it stinks," he said knowingly, dismissing the
show with a theatrical wave of his hand. "It'll be gone in eight months."

"I don't see how you can be mad at The Times," I said. "They stood by 'Barry
Lyndon.' "

Kubrick contemplated my remark, lit up as if remembering a distant but cherished
experience, and said, "I loved making that one." Then his mood abruptly changed.
"But I don't like being called a recluse."

Are you making a new movie?

I'm in pre-production.

What is it?

I can't say.

Who's producing it?

My own company.

You really should give us an interview.

No!

He rose to leave, then had a second thought. "I'm going to Dublin.  Call me when
I'm back on Wednesday between four and six, and I'll consider it." He left his
number.

Then he was gone, leaving us to celebrate our chance encounter with the great
man, a meeting as brief and disjointed as a dream.  Larry excitedly vouched for
the fact that Kubrick's new project was so secret that the director had summoned
Hollywood potentates like Mike Ovitz to London to read the script in person.
Having met Kubrick years earlier, he figured the director had approached him
because he recognized him.

"Kubrick is gay?" someone else asked, taking note of the director's entourage.

"Everyone always thought HAL the computer acted like a jealous gay lover in
'2001,' " I said.

"And 'Full Metal Jacket' was full of homoeroticism," Larry said.

On our euphoric way out, we quizzed the manager, who knew only one member of the
foursome, the white-haired man, whom he said was a Conservative Member of
Parliament.

"THAT TORY M.P. SHOULD HAVE BEEN THE tip-off," a friend at The Associated Press
told me when commiserating two days later. "They're always surrounded by con men
and rent-boys."

By then an executive at Warner Brothers, reached by phone, had expressed his
delight at the news that a tableful of journalists had been duped.  He also told
us that Kubrick's new film was no secret but was in fact a well-publicized
adaptation of a novel by someone I know. Kubrick's assistant called to add that
the director was neither beardless nor gay but was concerned about the impostor,
who had been sighted 15 to 20 times over the past two to three years.

As my friends reshuffled our strange night, we were puzzled. What did this con
artist want from us? He asked for nothing, not even our phone numbers to bilk us
on some future occasion. We, after all, had demanded that he sit down.

What made us want to believe him so much?  That was the real question. Were we
just looking for a scoop? Or were we like the restless New Yorkers fooled by the
Poitier impostor in "Six Degrees of Separation," searching for a connection that
might fill a vacuum in our own lives?

If nothing else, "Stanley Kubrick" had reaffirmed the irrational lure of the
monolith in "2001." All these years after 1968, I hadn't relinquished the hope
that someone would drop from the sky and magically tell me all the answers I
still don't know.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

White House Memo;
Weary Clinton Takes Break From His Own Frenetic Style

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: VAIL, Colo., Aug. 14


After a whirlwind first stretch that has lasted seven long months, President
Clinton has finally gone on vacation today. He has left Washington weary; even
worse, much of his support is exhausted.

Not for two generations has a new President sought to do so much, so fast and so
directly. And not since modern polling began has popular approval of a new
occupant of the White House declined so precipitously and failed to rebound.

Mr. Clinton, to be sure, is a plurality President, having won office with just
43 percent of the popular vote. That left his standing fragile from Inauguration
Day, guaranteeing that each fight would require a balancing act as he sought to
reconstitute a vague mandate for change.

But more than that has been at work to give Mr. Clinton's initial months in
office their frenetic cast. The triumphs and wreckage scattered across his
calendar reflect what he himself brought to the Presidency. More by nature than
circumstance, perhaps, Mr. Clinton governs by careering from one tight spot to
another.

That pattern reflects Mr. Clinton's inclination first to overreach, offering
schemes too ambitious for political reality, and then to pull back, leaving
confusion about which tack is authentic. From homosexuals in the military to the
battle over the budget, he has relied for extrication on words in torrents,
energy without sleep and, in the end, compromise.

Emotional Issues

Against early advice to maintain his promised focus on the economy, Mr. Clinton
has swept through a dizzying series of emotional issues, planting him in the
middle of dust-ups on nannies and Social Security, civil rights, accusations of
misconduct in the White House and the propriety of a haircut at the Los Angeles
airport.

Such stormy weather could hardly have been more different from the breezes or
steady trade winds that prevailed under his two Republican predecessors. But
then Mr. Clinton, who turns 47 on Thursday, is the first of the Vietnam War
generation to reach the White House, and the squalls of his tenure may reflect
something of his youth.

After taking a real vacation in four years, Mr. Clinton not surprisingly
responded, "Definitely," the other night when asked whether he was looking
forward to this one. (Even so, he will do a day's work on Monday in delivering a
health care address to the National Governor's Association in Tulsa, Okla.)

But it seemed somehow telling that Mr. Clinton and his family, who own no home
of their own, began their holiday with a visit to this Rocky Mountain resort and
its paterfamilias, former President Gerald R. Ford.

Among the misgivings of those who clamored for change, one may be that from
George Washington to George Bush, Americans have generally regarded Presidents
as fathers. In appearance and manner, Mr. Clinton has played more the role of a
brother or even a son.

That should not detract from the very real achievements of his first seven
months in office, and at news conferences, on talk radio shows and in public
forums, Mr. Clinton has grown accomplished at reminding his audiences of just
how much he has accomplished.

What Has Been Done

There was the quick Congressional agreement on the broad outlines of his budget,
he says. There was the Vancouver summit meeting and the pledge by the West to
help shore up the economy of the former Soviet Union. There was the deal to
allow logging in the Northwest while protecting spotted owls. There was the
passage of his national service plan, which provides college grants in return
for a commitment to community work.

And most important of all was the approval of his plan for spending cuts and tax
increases to shave $496 billion from the projected budget deficit over the next
five years. As the President asserted today in a radio address he taped before
beginning his holiday, "It puts our house in order with the largest deficit
reduction measure in our history."

But Mr. Clinton's very need to call attention to his victories suggests the
degree to which Americans have not seen them as such -- or the degree to which
the gains have been obscured by what else went wrong.

Turbulent Weeks

As landmarks in a young Presidency, the failed choices of Zoe Baird and Judge
Kimba M. Wood as Attorneys General; the flaps over the Presidential haircut; the
abrupt dismissal of the staff of the White House travel office, and the suicide
of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the deputy White House counsel, have in some ways
stood out even more than the triumphs.

Part of the reason, as Mr. Clinton's aides acknowledge, is that he is not adept
at making his victories look easy. Rather than choosing a modest goal at the
outset, Mr. Clinton's inclination has been to reach for the stars, and only then
to walk his sights back to earth.

That pattern reflects two contradictory impulses that Mr. Clinton shares with
many members of his generation: idealism and a preference for consensus. But in
the political world, they leave him in the position of always appearing to
retreat, with each accommodation raising questions in the minds of many voters
about what he truly believes in.

That was the case with Mr. Clinton's budget proposal, whose early promises of a
middle-class tax cut were quickly withdrawn, with other ambitious elements later
cast aside to satisfy lawmakers' objections. The endless haggling took its toll:
public support for the package dropped even after it was approved by Congress.

Different Yardsticks

To those who ask why he seems so willing to compromise, Mr. Clinton has insisted
that toughness should be measured in the task. He says he would rather do hard
things than merely talk tough about them.

But compromise, even to achieve a goal, stands at odds with the kind of public
swagger Americans usually admire in politicians. If that translates to weakness,
as it appears to have done, it raises the danger of self-perpetuation, with each
concession inviting another.

After an election that was more a referendum on his opponent than on himself,
Mr. Clinton and his advisers had recognized that these first months would be a
forum for public judgment. Even in January, Mr. Clinton's pollster, Stanley
Greenberg, was issuing reminders about the fickleness of public opinion.

As others marveled over how high Mr. Clinton's approval rating had soared, Mr.
Greenberg noted that George Bush had embarked on his Presidency from similar
heights.

Change of Generations

What perhaps no one could measure seven months ago was how Mr. Clinton's youth,
and that of his cadre of aides, would affect perceptions of his Presidency. By
defeating a man 22 years older, Mr. Clinton won the single greatest generational
contest for the White House in more than a century.

If his youth served then as a symbol of all that would be different, it has also
carried with it the risk that affairs of state would seem to be in less than
full control. When Mr. Clinton owns up to mistakes, or his staff apologizes for
error, the impression left sometimes is less that of contrition than of
inexperience.

As the leader of the free world at last month's Group of Seven meeting in Tokyo,
Mr. Clinton carried out his role with aplomb. But there remain occasional
reminders of just how young this new President can seem.

At the Denver airport this week, Mr. Clinton even became his own soundman when
he encountered a malfunctioning microphone as he tried to introduce John Paul
II. "Can you hear me?" the President of the United States shouted repeatedly.
"Can you hear me now?"

Each time, Mr. Clinton glumly answered his own question, "No," but the Pope
looked on beatifically.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton with former President Gerald R. Ford yesterday
before teeing off at a golf course near Vail, Colo. (Reuters) (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese, Identity Split, Wait for Pope

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Aug. 14


Awaiting their Sunday visit with Pope John Paul II, Vietnamese Catholics today
brought carpets to spread on the ground and blankets to keep the children warm
as they prayed and listened to music that fused rock and the Orient.

But as they gathered in a Denver suburb last night in anticipation of their
historic meeting, they also brought with them a dilemma: after the fall of
Saigon 18 years ago and their immigration to the United States, how are these
new Americans to persuade their children to maintain old ways and beliefs in a
secular society that challenges them profoundly?

"I have felt torn between the two cultures," said Margarette Vu, a 17-year-old
Vietnamese-American. Ms. Vu, who lives in Portland, Ore., has been chosen by the
hierarchy of the Vietnamese church to speak to the Pope in his native Polish
when he meets with about 10,000 Vietnamese-American Catholics at Denver's
McNichols Sports Arena on Sunday before winding up a four-day stay in Colorado
and returning to Rome.

Like many other Catholic groups, the Vietnamese have been drawn here by the
Pope's presence for the church's World Youth Day festivities.

A Privileged Audience

And the Pope has singled out the Vietnamese as the only ethnic group with which
he will meet. Vietnamese church leaders say the Pope extended this privilege, in
part, because, as a Pole who long felt suppressed by his nation's communist
dictatorship, he feels a particular affinity to Vietnamese.

For that reason, too, the Pope may well use his encounter on Sunday to evoke the
plight of the estimated seven million Catholics in Vietnam, many of them in the
south of the country, whose priests and places of worship have been severely
restricted by Vietnam's Government.

"The Holy Father understands the suffering we have endured and the pressure of
oppression until now," said the Rev. Vincent Nguyen of Detroit. "He has never
made the comparison with Poland in public, but in his heart he understands how
deeply we suffer and he has always tried to alleviate the pain."

To young Vietnamese like Ms. Vu, some of that pain results from the feeling of
being torn by the mores of two very different cultures. For example, she cited
what she called an "apple pie" American tradition: teen-age dating, a practice
prohibited in traditional Vietnamese society, in which parents exercise far
greater control over their children than American parents do.

Cross-Cultural Struggles

"I want to be like my American friends, but we have to hold on to our heritage
because that's all that's left," said Ms. Vu, who was born in 1975 after her
parents fled Saigon and has never seen the country that frames her sense of
cultural identity. "That is something my generation must understand."

Her beliefs about tradition, though, are not universal, Father Vincent said, and
he expressed concern about a deepening generation gap among the 300,000
Vietnamese Catholics who, he estimates, now live in the United States. They are
the descendants of Southeast Asians who were converted by Spanish missionaries
in the 16th century and whose faith was later reinforced during French
occupation.

"There are a lot of struggles, of conflicts, between husband and wife, between
parents and children," said Father Vincent, a 51-year-old senior official of the
Vietnamese clergy in America. He fled Saigon for Guam by ship the night before
the former South Vietnamese capital fell and has never been back, he said.

"In Vietnam, family discipline is very strict," he said. "The children always
obey parents in most everything -- choosing schools, choosing boyfriends or
girlfriends. Here, they just go ahead."

Freedom and Youth Gangs

Hoang Nguyen, a 28-year-old mail-carrier, said, "It's such a big gap. The
generation that came in 1975 still has the old tradition. Here, the kids now
would like to do what they want to do."

Mr. Nguyen is a member of the Eucharist Youth Group at the Queen of Vietnam
Martyrs church in Denver, the parish attended by some of the 4,000 Vietnamese
Catholics here and the site of last night's prayers and music.

Sometimes, said Mr. Nguyen's fiancee, 25-year-old Thuy Cao, the quest for more
freedom has led young Vietnamese to join gangs. In fact, she said, gangs are a
growing problem for Vietnamese Catholics in this country as they seek to draw
teen-agers into the church. Father Vincent estimates that about half of young
Vietnamese between the ages of 17 and 30 are regular churchgoers.

Ms. Cao said: "They are trying to be in some kind of group, to be accepted. They
want too much freedom."

But Phuong Nguyen, a 16-year-old high school student from Minnesota, said that
freedom was something young Vietnamese had already won in the United States.

Parents have "had to kind of loosen up," he said as he clutched a can of beer
and posed for a photograph with an arm around his 15-year-old girlfriend. His
companion, who also identified herself as Phuong Nguyen, of Denver, added: "But
we can't do bad stuff. Our parents want us to be better people."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Violence And the Young

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


Last summer the "Munecas," an all-girl Little League softball team in Camden,
N.J., won a championship behind a power-hitting 11-year-old named Samalica
Ortiz.

This year the "Munecas," which means "Little Dolls," made it to the finals but
lost the championship game, 14-13. Samalica was not there. Last Nov. 22 she was
shot to death at a friend's birthday party.

The bullet was not meant for her. It was fired in a gunfight that erupted
outside the house where the party was held. But Samalica was sitting by a window
and the bullet struck her in the head. Thus she joined the enormous and growing
cadre of children who are lost to us suddenly and forever because of violence.

Why the nation is not trembling with outrage over this, I don't know. Perhaps it
is denial. Perhaps ignorance. Maybe other reasons. In any event, our epidemic of
violence is having a devastating effect on the young. The American Psychological
Association, in a report on "Violence and Youth," cited a study of first and
second graders in Washington:

"Forty-five percent said they had witnessed muggings, 31 percent said they had
witnessed shootings and 39 percent said they had seen dead bodies."

First and second graders. Little kids no longer have to make up monsters, we
provide them with the real thing.

With no concerted effort to check it, violence has spun way out of control. More
Americans have been murdered already in the 1990's than were killed in all the
years of Vietnam. According to the F.B.I., there were more than 24,000 homicides
in the United States in 1991 and an estimated 23,000 last year.

In growing numbers, children and teen-agers are among the killers as well as the
killed.

In Kansas City last week a 15-year-old boy pulled out a gun in a movie theater
and shot his mother to death.

In El Monte, Calif., police reported that two young men riding around on a
bicycle (one was on the handle bars) shot two people to death and wounded a
third on Tuesday night.

Over and over we are hearing the lament of Joanne Ackie, who cried out, "I can't
believe this is happening" after her 17-year-old son Kareem was shot in the back
and killed in Harlem last month.

On Wednesday President Clinton announced his effort to put more police on the
streets and tighten gun-control measures. It will not accomplish much. The truth
is, law enforcement alone cannot stem the ferocious tide of violence in the
United States. A much more comprehensive approach -- a national campaign against
violence -- is necessary.

Last Sunday the National Medical Association, which represents 16,000 black
physicians, held a special session at its convention in San Antonio on "violence
reduction in the African-American community."

The consensus, according to the association's president, Dr. Leonard Lawrence,
"was that we've really got to teach our young people that there are alternative
ways of problem solving," and "that there is some value in being disciplined."

The doctors did not want to understate the degree to which poverty, poor
schooling, racism, drug and alcohol abuse, the availability of guns and other
factors contribute to violence among the young. But you can get a handle on
violent behavior, Dr. Lawrence said, "if you begin to teach youngsters the
positive aspects of discipline at a very early age, teaching them how to
achieve, how to learn, how to interact with other people."

Adults -- parents and others -- have to spend more time with youngsters, he
said. And he urged successful African-Americans to serve as mentors to boys and
girls struggling to grow up in difficult environments.

There is no reason to limit the consensus of the doctors to the black community.
Young people everywhere are full of energy and enthusiasm and the desire for
excitement. There is always danger when that energy is not channeled by adults.

Tougher law enforcement is essential but it's not nearly enough. By the time the
police are called, something terrible has already happened.

The black physicians are on to something, and others have reached similar
conclusions. There are many programs operating around the country to defuse
violence. A national campaign against violence would find out what is working
best and what more is needed.

Right now it's a lot more.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE POPE IN AMERICA;
Pope Edits His Most Critical Language to End Visit on Positive Note

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1279 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Aug. 15


On the last day of his stay in the United States, Pope John Paul II scaled back
criticism of American moral values, apparently seeking to recast the image of
his visit as that of a pastor to his flock rather than a chastising prophet of
decline.

Addressing the final Mass of his four-day visit, the pontiff departed from the
prepared text of a speech to nearly 400,000 worshipers at Cherry Creek State
Park, deleting emotive language about abortion and other "horrible crimes
against humanity" and skipping a passage that spoke of America's "confusion
about what is right and what is wrong."

The Pope also deleted some emotive language from a speech to young people at a
vigil on Saturday night, although the prepared text of his remarks endures as
the Vatican's official record of the remarks. Today's omissions were far more
extensive, suggesting that he wished to strike a positive note as he left the
United States.

The impact of the deletions was to focus attention on the Pope's message to
young people, whom he urged to "go out into the streets and public places" to
campaign for moral revival.

"You must feel the full urgency of the task," the pontiff said. "Woe to you if
you do not succeed in defending life."

Thousands Fall Ill

One effect of the omissions was to shorten the Pope's speech, possibly
reflecting his concern for his audience; with temperatures in the mid-80's, many
people suffered dehydration and heat exhaustion. In addition, Denver's high
altitude and dust triggered respiratory problems and asthma attacks. A
60-year-old man died of a heart attack and at least 18,000 people sought medical
help during a 14-mile pilgrimage to the Mass site on Saturday, the prayer vigil
Saturday night and today's Mass, officials said.

Since the Pope arrived here on Thursday to mark the Roman Catholic Church's
World Youth Day, the pontiff has returned insistently to what he evidently
regards as central themes for contemplation by young Catholics: the protection
of life from conception until natural death, urban violence fueled by the media
and the corrosion of moral values.

At the same, though, he has sought to place his opposition to abortion and
euthanasia in the context of what he sees as a broader assault on human life.

"In our own century, the 'culture of death' has assumed a social and
institutional form of legality to justify the most horrible crimes against
humanity: genocide, 'final solutions', 'ethnic cleansing' and the massive
'taking of human beings even before they are born or before they reach the
natural point of death,' " he said in one passage omitted from today's speech.

Moreover, he sought today to advance a view of the challenges to human life
beyond those like abortion that generally stir controversy. "The family
especially is under attack. And the sacred character of human life denied," he
told the worshipers. "Naturally, the weakest members of society are the most at
risk: the unborn, children, the sick, the handicapped, the old, the poor and
unemployed, the immigrant and refugee, the South of the world."

Just as significant, he refrained from repeating earlier criticism of what he
depicts as a dangerous trend in American thinking away from the concept that
anything may be "considered intrinsically good and universally binding."

"When the Founding Fathers of this great nation enshrined certain inalienable
rights in the Constitution, they did so because they recognized the existence of
a law -- a series of rights and duties -- engraved by the Creator on each
person's heart and conscience," one of the deleted passages said.

"In much of contemporary thinking, any reference to a law guaranteed by the
Creator is absent," it went on. "Vast sectors of society are confused about what
is right and what is wrong, and are at the mercy of those with the power to
create opinion and impose it on others."

Catholic Woodstock

The Pope's jubilant reception among some 160,000 young people here has visibly
inspired him, particularly at the prayer vigil in Cherry Creek State Park on
Saturday night that reinforced the occasion's nickname among older people who
remember the 1969 rock concert -- the Catholic Woodstock.

But his message has been a somber rejection of the permissiveness the original
Woodstock implied for a generation's sexual morality, bringing the pontiff into
direct conflict not only with the Clinton Administration's abortion-rights
policy but also with the practices of many American Catholics who disregard the
church's teachings on artificial birth control.

Even in today's shortened speech he spoke of an "apocalyptic combat" between
"the culture of death" and "the culture of life," and said, "Today, that
struggle has become increasingly direct."

His utterances have received differing interpretations among Catholics, but the
Pope left no doubt that, as when he met President Clinton on his arrival here on
Thursday, he viewed abortion and euthanasia as central issues in a world where
"death battles life."

Just before he left for Rome, the Pontiff once agin repeated his opposition to
abortion. In a brief departure address at Stapleton International Airport with
Vice President Al Gore, he defined the "culture of life" broadly as "respect for
nature and protection of God's work of creation" as well as "service to the
underprivileged, the poor and the oppressed." But, he went on, "In a special
way, it means respect for human life from the first moment of conception to its
natural end."

The Pope spoke moments after holding a 25-minute private meeting with Mr. Gore
at the airport.

Earlier today, in a visit at the Mount St. Vincent Home for emotionally
disturbed children, he said, "May God give us hearts large enough to embrace all
children everywhere, and arms strong enough to protect them and support them."

On his final day in Denver, the pontiff maintained a brisk schedule, presiding
over the Mass at the park, having lunch with senior clerics, talking to
representatives of America's 300,000 Vietnamese Catholics and visiting the
children at the Mount St. Vincent Home.

Aiming for the Young

His program included a period of rest in the afternoon that reflected a
perceptible slowing of pace since the early days of his 15-year papacy.

While insisting that the Pope's health is robust after surgery last year to
remove a large colon tumor, his aides have acknowledged that he has been
fatigued by the journey. Today, as he spoke at the open-air Mass, the Pope, 73,
seemed relaxed after a night's rest.

Throughout the Pope's stay, his message has been meant to inspire what he sees
as a generation of young people threatened with moral drift even as it
represents the future leaders and evangelists of the Catholic Church.

"At this stage of history, the liberating of the Gospel of Life has been put
into your hands. And the mission of proclaiming it to the ends of the earth is
now passing to your generation," he said.

"Do not be afraid to go out into the streets and into public places like the
first apostles who preached Christ and the good news of salvation in the squares
of cities, towns and villages. This is not time to be ashamed of the Gospel. It
is the time to be proud of the Gospel. It is time to preach it from the
rooftops."

The Pope also met with representatives of America's Vietnamese Catholics and
used the occasion to evoke the plight of Vietnam's seven million Catholics,
whose activities have long been restricted by communist rulers. His words, he
said, were being relayed to Vietnam by a radio link.

"To all of you I make this appeal: do not forget the church in Vietnam," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pope John Paul II greeting supporters as he made his way to the
altar after his arrival yesterday at Cherry Creek State Park in Denver. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Switching To a New Camera Angle

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 16


As an actor, Forest Whitaker has worked with film directors of the highest rank:
Martin Scorsese, Barry Levinson, Oliver Stone, Clint Eastwood.

"I've learned from them all," said Mr. Whitaker, a quiet-spoken 32-year-old
actor who has suddenly embarked on a directing career that threatens to
overshadow his acting.

Mr. Whitaker's directing debut, "Strapped," a frightening portrait of violence
among inner-city youths, will start on Home Box Office on Saturday. The drama is
part of HBO's continuing series of provocative and, for television, unusual
movies, which will also include "And the Band Played On," based on Randy
Shilts's book about AIDS and directed by Roger Spottiswoode, to start on Sept.
11, and "Attica," about the 1971 prison uprising, directed by John
Frankenheimer. "Attica" is to be shown early next year.

From Bird to Jody

Mr. Whitaker, a bear of a man, once studied to be a classical tenor. In his
11-year acting career, he has had a number of prominent roles, including the
tormented jazz musician Charlie Parker in Mr. Eastwood's "Bird." But at this
point he is perhaps best known for having played Jody, the British soldier who
is seized by the Irish Republican Army in Neil Jordan's "Crying Game."

In a recent interview at the HBO offices in Century City, Mr. Whitaker said with
shrug, "It was clear to me that 'Crying Game' was an excellent script, but I
never, never thought the movie would turn into what it was."

When "The Crying Game" opened in this country last fall, Mr. Whitaker was in the
midst of directing "Strapped" in New York. Even before "Strapped" was completed,
word began to spread here that Mr. Whitaker was highly talented as a director.
He has since received more than dozen directing offers, from big studios and
independent companies, and is now casting a new film, "The Number Four,"
produced by Tri-Star. The movie is about the hijacking of a Los Angeles bus
filled with a cross-section of residents.

"It's fascinating for me," Mr. Whitaker said. "I could get a job tomorrow on a
good film as a director easier than I can as an actor. All because of one little
film."

In the Brooklyn Projects

Written by Dena Kleiman, a former reporter for The New York Times, "Strapped" is
cast largely with unknown actors. It takes place in the housing projects of
Brooklyn and deals with the epidemic of violence there, as teen-agers gun down
other teen-agers and the police are unable to stop them. In one particularly
brutal scene, a little girl is accidentally shot to death in a grocery store as
her mother wails in horror.

"The movie, for me, is about the way these people feel about their lives, the
choices they have," Mr. Whitaker said. "It's not really about the gun trade but
about this urban environment. The gun is a metaphor for power. I went to the
projects and I was just blown away. You hear gunshots all the time. Kids in the
playground don't even look around. It's horrible.

"Just as in any kind of dysfunction, the first process is to be able to look at
yourself, acknowledge to yourself that this is all unbelievable, that this has
got to stop."

He acknowledges that his acting career has been relatively free of hardship,
starting in 1982 when he appeared as a football player in Amy Heckerling's "Fast
Times at Ridgemont High." In addition to starring in "Bird" in 1988, he appeared
in Mr. Scorsese's "Color of Money" in 1986, Mr. Stone's "Platoon," also in 1986,
and in Mr. Levinson's "Good Morning, Vietnam" in 1988.

As a black man, Mr. Whitaker is especially pleased that some of his parts,
including the ones in "Good Morning, Vietnam" and "The Color of Money" and one
in Walter Hill's "Johnny Handsome," were at first written for white characters.
"I've been more fortunate than a lot of black actors," said Mr. Whitaker, who is
unmarried and lives in Los Angeles.

Strong Influences

Although Mr. Whitaker says that "Strapped" has "a style of its own," he admits
that many of the directors he has worked with have influenced him.

"On a Clint Eastwood film, there's an ease and comfort; everything seems to
operate so quietly, so perfectly," he said. "It leaves the actors room to
create. Eastwood's personality commands a certain work ethic from all the people
who work with him."

"Barry Levinson was really open and creative, allowing people to work on the
script," Mr. Whitaker continued. "Scorsese seemed to be so focused, he
eliminated all the peripheral things around him to take the space he needed to
create on his own. And with Oliver Stone you got this overwhelming passion.
Nothing else mattered. You had to make the film work. That passion is pushed and
pushed."

"Their personalities are different, their styles are different," he said. "You
learn from all of them."

College and Acting School

Mr. Whitaker, the son of an insurance salesman and a schoolteacher, grew up in
largely black, middle-class neighborhoods in Los Angeles. It was his voice that
led to scholarships to the University of Southern California, but an appearance
in a high school production of Dylan Thomas's "Under Milk Wood" started his
interest in acting. After attending U.S.C. for a couple of years, he won a
scholarship to the Drama Studio, London, a school based in Berkeley, Calif.,
that teaches both American and British acting styles.

As a first-time director, filming a drama on a highly charged topic, Mr.
Whitaker periodically tangled with HBO executives over some of the language in
the movie, he said, as well as over the use of Brooklyn, as opposed to the more
convenient Manhattan, for locations.

"I had fights with them," he said. "But I asked a lot of them, too. They let me
change the script; they let me do the casting. They let me do it all.
Ultimately, they were really supportive."

Directing, he said, is more arduous but less stressful than acting. "Acting, for
me at least, involves so much pain," he said. "I take it home with me. It's not
fun. But I love working with actors. I love working on the script. I love the
creative process. I love working with the crew. To create a living thing, to
find the truth, to create a universe, is one of the most exciting things
imaginable. It's really beautiful."

'Crying Game' Differences

"The Crying Game," Mr. Whitaker said, left him with ambivalent feelings. The
film itself was superb, he said, but the way it was sold to the public
distressed him.

Discussing the film's pivotal character, Dil, played by Jaye Davidson, Mr.
Whitaker said: "In the beginning, when they marketed the film and said it had
this big secret, I liked that. But toward the end, I found it rude. I felt that
by not allowing people to talk to Dil, by not allowing Dil to come out to the
public, they were doing the same thing that the movie was trying to fight
against."

"The movie was not about homosexuality," he said. "It's about people being able
to see people for what they really are. Once you get past certain perceptions,
you can find something beautiful about people."

NAME: Forest Whitaker

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the age of 32, Forest Whitaker makes his directing debut
with the HBO movie "Strapped." (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. C13); Bokeem
Woodbine in "Strapped," Forest Whitaker's first directorial effort. The HBO film
will be broadcast on Saturday. (Demmie Todd/HBO)(pg. C18)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Jacob D. Beam, Envoy to Soviets At Start of Detente, Is Dead at 85

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words


Jacob D. Beam, a diplomat who served in the United States' most sensitive
foreign post in the 1970's as Ambassador to the Soviet Union, died on Monday at
a hospital in Rockville, Md. He was 85 and lived in Washington.

The cause was a stroke, his family said.

President Richard M. Nixon appointed Mr. Beam to the post in Moscow. His tenure,
from 1969 to 1973, was in a delicate period when the United States was shifting
gears from the lingering Vietnam War and embarking on detente.

Although the assignment capped Mr. Beam's career, it proved bittersweet. Henry
A. Kissinger, as national security adviser during President Nixon's first term,
engaged in shuttle diplomacy that sometimes undercut the State Department. In
advance of a 1972 summit meeting, he met secretly with top Soviet officials in
Moscow, and did not tell the embassy until the talks were over. Mr. Beam never
publicly complained. In his memoirs, Mr. Kissinger expressed regret, describing
Mr. Beam as "a true professional" who "deserved better."

Momentous Assignments

Through his 42 years as a diplomat, Mr. Beam repeatedly turned up in strategic
locales at momentous points, when the stakes involved war, invasion, national
independence or moves for disarmament and peace.

An early assignment was the American Embassy in Berlin from 1934 to 1940. When
Mr. Beam arrived, he later recalled, the staff had not gathered information on
the Nazis.

He saw the growing threat and on a visit to Washington surprised many by
predicting that Germany would defeat France and push the British back to the
English Channel. His forecast came true within a year.

From 1941 to 1944, he served in London as Britain battled for survival. After
World War II ended, he returned to Germany, advising the government of
occupation set up by the Allies.

In 1949 and 1950 he was posted to Indonesia as it gained independence from the
Netherlands. He also served on a United Nations commission for the emerging
country.

Careful Preparation

At 6 feet 2, Mr. Beam towered over most colleagues and was respected for his
knowledge and formidable diplomatic skills.

Sensing the importance of the Soviets, he had paid out of his own pocket for
lessons in Russian history and language. He also negotiated in French, German,
Serbian and Polish.

His preparation paid off in 1953, when he was the charge d'affaires in Moscow
during a vacancy in the ambassador's post. A crisis developed as Stalin fell ill
and died, and a power struggle ensued.

Mr. Beam kept the embassy operating smoothly, informing Washington on the
fast-changing events. He was briefly elevated to ambassador to attend Stalin's
funeral.

In 1955 he was placed in charge of the State Department's office of Eastern
European Affairs during a turbulent period in that region.

Talks in Poland

As the cold war continued, President Eisenhower named Mr. Beam to his first
ambassadorship, to Poland. That assignment, from 1957 to 1961, had much broader
import because Warsaw was the only place for diplomatic contact between China
and the United States, which did not recognize the Communist government of
China.

Tensions were rising because China was demanding -- with occasional gunfire for
emphasis -- that the Nationalist Chinese give up the offshore islands Quemoy and
Matsu. But as talks developed in Warsaw, tensions eased.

Mr. Beam became the assistant director of the Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency in 1962. He was Ambassador to Czechoslovakia from 1966 to 1969, a period
that included the Soviet invasion in 1968 to crush Prague's deviation from
Communist orthodoxy. Despite the dangers, Mr. Beam drove amid the Russian tanks
in his green Chevrolet convertible. He organized convoys to transport stranded
Americans and let reporters use the embassy telex to file dispatches.

Mr. Beam was born in Princeton, N.J. As a young man, he traveled in Europe with
his father, who taught German at Princeton University, and also visited an uncle
who served as the American minister to Yugoslavia.

After graduating from Princeton in 1929, Mr. Beam studied a year in England
before joining the Foreign Service in 1931 in Switzerland. There he helped
monitor the League of Nations.

On an assignment in Yugoslavia, he met Margaret Glassford, a United States
Information Service worker, and they married.

After retiring as the Ambassador to the Soviet Union, he served as chairman of
Radio Free Europe.

Besides his wife, his survivors include a son, Alex, of Newton, Mass., and three
grandchildren.

-

NAME: Jacob D. Beam

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Denies Making Offer

BYLINE: Reuter

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 73 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 16


Vietnam denied Monday that it had offered Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown
$700,000 to help get the American economic embargo lifted. A foreign ministry
spokesman said the accusation, reported in the Aug. 23 issue of U.S. News &
World Report, was groundless and was aimed at hurting relations between the
United States and Vietnam. Mr. Brown described the accusation by a Vietnamese
business consultant in Florida as ridiculous.


LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

To Sarajevo, Writer Brings Good Will and 'Godot'

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzego vina, Aug. 18


A charged silence settled over the theater as actors and audience took a long,
painful pause, digesting a message of hope deceived that is a defining passage
of a new dramatic production performed here for the first time on Tuesday.

To hear the silence of the packed house in the small theater in the city center
was to feel the grief and disappointment that weigh on Sarajevo as it nears the
end of its second summer under siege.

The play is Samuel Beckett's "Waiting for Godot," and the moment of silence
comes when a boy arrives and announces himself as a messenger for Mr. Godot, the
mysterious figure for whom the outcasts Vladimir and Estragon, hungry and
homeless, have been waiting, in hope of a release from despair.

"Mr. Godot told me to tell you that he won't come this evening, but surely
tomorrow," the boy said in Serbo-Croatian, his voice heavy with embarrassment
and regret.

An Almost Inevitable Choice

In the theater, the only sounds were from the street outside, of a United
Nations armored vehicle thundering past on its steel tracks, and, from somewhere
in the distance, the blast of a mortar shell. The audience sat stock still.
Among them were surgeons from the city's main hospital, soldiers from the front,
Government officials who must juggle allotments of food for a population in
growing hunger, people who have lost fathers and sisters and sons, and one man
in a wheelchair, an actor before the war, who lost both legs when a mortar
struck outside his home last summer.

Overseeing the play is Susan Sontag, author of 15 books and an occasional
theater director. "Waiting for Godot" is her contribution to Sarajevo's theater
and film festival, running from now until the end of September.

The choice of "Waiting for Godot" was almost inevitable. Like the outcasts,
Sarajevo has waited for relief from afar, the Western military intervention that
many here believe is the only thing that can stop the Serbian nationalist forces
besieging the city from destroying what is left here.

But the play is also a personal metaphor for Ms. Sontag, who is virtually alone
among the well-known writers and artists and performers of Europe and the United
States in coming to Sarajevo during the siege. (The American folk singer Joan
Baez performed here in April.) But this is Ms. Sontag's second trip, after a
first journey here in April with her son, David Rieff, who has written articles
about the war for The New Yorker.

Ms. Sontag, who is 60 years old, came here from her home in Manhattan to work
without pay. But some of the actors she has worked with have come hungry each
day, some so exhausted after walking two hours to reach the theater that they
have had to lie down after only half an hour's rehearsal.

With them, she has scrounged for props, using flour sacks from United Nations
relief stocks for seats, United Nations-supplied plastic sheeting, used to cover
holes in windows and walls, as a skirt for the stage, and candles to provide dim
stage lighting.

An Honorary Citizen

To the people of Sarajevo, Ms. Sontag has become a symbol, interviewed
frequently by the local newspapers and television, invited to speak at
gatherings everywhere, asked for autographs on the street. After the opening
performance of the play, the city's Mayor, Muhamed Kresevljakovic, came onstage
to declare her an honorary citizen, the only foreigner other than the recently
departed United Nations commander, Lieut. Gen. Phillippe Morillon, to be so
named.

"It is for your bravery, in coming here, living here, and working with us," he
said.

The fact that Sarajevo has had so few visitors from the world of arts and
letters has been especially striking because of the role culture has played in
the city under siege.

Local writers and artists and actors and painters and musicians and film
directors banded together at an early stage of the siege to produce works to
sustain morale among the city's 380,000 residents. Many of those involved in the
productions have been part-time soldiers, digging trenches and carrying rifles
at the front, then taking their off days to work at what some, with a wry
reference to the Marxist jargon that was once fashionable here, refer to as "the
cultural front."

Some prominent Bosnian artists, like Emir Kusturica, a film director, have
stayed away from the city throughout the siege. But Haris Pasovic, the
31-year-old producer of "Waiting for Godot," ran across the airport at night
under Serbian machine-gun fire to get back into Sarajevo last fall, so that he
could perform in defiance of what he calls "barbarism and fascism."

"We want to make our lives as normal as possible," he said. "We want our work to
be impeccable."

Groups Working Together

Part of the defiance has been something that would have been unremarkable in
this ethnically mixed city before the war -- performers of all ethnic groups
working together, in refutation of the claim by the Serbian nationalists'
leader, Radovan Karadzic, that Serbs and Muslims and Croats have a natural
hatred for one another, "like cats and dogs."

In "Waiting for Godot," a Croatian actress, Ines Fancovic, plays Pozzo, one of
the play's four characters, and there are several Serbian actors and actresses
alongside Muslims and Croats among the three sets of Vladimirs and Estragons
that are one of Ms. Sontag's innovations. The set and costume designer, Ognjenka
Finci, is Jewish.

Ms. Sontag is to leave here on Friday, to return to New York and work on a new
novel. But she says she will be back here in the fall, probably to direct
another play, and in an interview she called other writers and artists and
performers to what she described as a "moral duty."

"Sarajevo is the Spanish Civil War of our time, but the difference in response
is amazing," she said. "In 1937, people like Ernest Hemingway and Andre Malraux
and George Orwell and Simone Weil rushed to Spain, although it was incredibly
dangerous. Simone Weil got terrible burns and George Orwell got shot, but they
didn't see the danger as a reason not to go. They went as an act of solidarity,
and from that act grew some of the finest literature of their time."

After her first trip here, Ms. Sontag said, she talked with other well-known
writers and producers in Europe and the United States who expressed surprise
that she had been willing to risk her life.

'A Failure of Conscience'

"But I don't think the fact that Sarajevo is dangerous is really the reason,"
she said. "I think there is an underlying reason that is deeper and more
disturbing, and it is the difference between 1937 and 1993. I think there has
been a failure of conscience on the part of writers and intellectuals in the
Western world."

As Ms. Sontag spoke, a huge blast shook the neighborhood near the theater,
another shell from the Serbian guns.

A quarter of a century ago, in 1968, and again in 1972, Ms. Sontag traveled to
North Vietnam, along with other American intellectuals opposed to the United
States' role in the war there, and gained a reputation as a pacifist. But in
this, too, she has marked her distance from some of her old companions in the
antiwar movement. In Sarajevo, she has made no secret of her support for
American military intervention against the Serbs.

"It's not Godot I am waiting for," she said. "Like most of the people in
Sarajevo, I am waiting for Clinton."

NAME: Susan Sontag

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Susan Sontag, who is staging "Waiting for Godot" in Sarajevo,
sat amid the debris of war outside the theater where it is playing. (Chris
Helgren/Reuters, for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Bars a Senator's Visit With Dissident

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 19


Vietnam prevented Senator Charles Robb of Virginia from seeing a prominent
jailed Vietnamese dissident today, and Senator Robb said Hanoi had lost a chance
to send a positive signal on relations with Washington.

Mr. Robb, who arrived in Ho Chi Minh City in the morning, said he had an
appointment to meet Nguyen Dan Que, a doctor jailed for 20 years in 1991 for
"subversive activities against the people's power."

The Democratic legislator told reporters later in Hanoi that when he arrived, he
was told the appointment was canceled.

Mr. Que, 51, is one of the most prominent imprisoned Vietnamese dissidents. He
was the first member in Vietnam of the human rights group Amnesty International.

The people's court in Ho Chi Minh City found him guilty of founding an
organization aimed at overthrowing the Communist Government, distributing
leaflets and inciting people against Communism.

Mr. Que was jailed earlier for political reasons, from 1978 to 1988, and was
rearrested in June 1990 after criticizing the Government. His brother lives in
Senator Robb's constituency.

Senator Robb said he would present medicine and messages from Mr.  Que's
brother, which he had hoped to present to Mr. Que himself, to Interior Minister
Bui Thien Ngo on Friday.

Mr. Robb made it clear that he thought Vietnam had lost a chance to show good
will at a time when it hoped the United States would lift its economic embargo
and normalize relations. The two countries still have no diplomatic ties
although the Vietnam War ended 18 years ago.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Miss Williams, Mr. Peele

SECTION: Section 9; Page 12; Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Kimberly Anne Williams, a daughter of Mrs. DeWitt F. Helm Jr. of New York and
the late John A. Williams, was married yesterday to John Eric Peele, the son of
Arlene H. Peele of Washington, N.C., and the late Pvt. Charles M. Peele of the
United States Army. The Rev. Stephen Bauman officiated at Christ Church United
Methodist in New York.

Mrs. Peele is a teacher at the Boxwood Preschool in Greensboro, N.C. She
graduated from Guilford College. Her father was the chairman of Merrill Lynch
Japan in Tokyo.

Mr. Peele is a financial consultant at Merrill Lynch in Greensboro. He graduated
from the University of North Carolina. His mother is a nurse at Pitt County
Memorial Hospital in Greenville, N.C. His father died in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Perot Assails Clinton Economic Plan

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: TROY, N.Y., Aug. 21


In his first speaking tour of New York State since becoming a political force,
Ross Perot today criticized the Clinton economic plan, called for rejection of
the North American Free Trade Agreement and urged his supporters to make a
difference in elections at all levels.

"In 1994, the entire House of Representatives is running for office and
one-third of the Senate is running for office, right?" Mr. Perot asked a crowd
of about 1,500 people in a half-empty college gymnasium in Troy. "You can be the
swing vote across this country, every place in the country."

Mr. Perot said in his 70-minute speech here that voters should demand changes in
the economic plan just passed by Congress and signed by President Clinton, which
is intended to make modest reductions in the Federal Government by raising a
variety of taxes and cutting spending on programs like Medicare.

'Make It Clear'

"Just make it clear that if they want your vote they're going to have to give us
an overhauled plan that balances the budget and pays down the debt, because it
is wrong to leave our children this burden," Mr. Perot said. "And we want the
line-item veto, we want a balanced-budget amendment and, finally, we want a
term-limits law that at a minimum kicks in if they don't stay on this plan and
phase it down."

Mr. Perot scheduled four stops on his trip to New York -- Buffalo on Friday
night, Syracuse and Troy today, and Stony Brook, L.I., tonight. He attracted
about 3,000 listeners in Buffalo.

Organizers in Syracuse had expected more than 2,500 people to pack the
Crouse-Hinds auditorium at the Onondaga County Civic Center, but only about
1,000 people attended.

The 90-minute rally combined elements of a whistle-stop tour, tent revival and
book promotion, as Mr. Perot spoke about his favorite topics: Congressional
benefits, lobbyists, the North American Free Trade Agreement, trade with Vietnam
and the national economy.

"What kind of people are we?" Mr. Perot asked in Syracuse. "We are people who
work hard. We play by the rules. We live in the center field of ethical
behavior. We take responsibility for rearing good children."

Earlier this year Mr. Perot, a Texan, pledged to speak in all 50 states in 1993
in an effort to encourage membership in his political organization, United We
Stand America. After this weekend he will have appeared in 68 cities in 31
states, said Sharon Holman, his press secretary.

In the 1992 Presidential campaign, Mr. Perot won won 16 percent of the vote in
New York.

Respect From Cuomo

That was less than the 19 percent of the vote that Mr. Perot won nationwide, but
it was more than enough to capture the attention of many New York politicians,
particularly Gov. Mario M. Coumo, who may run for a fourth four-year term next
year.

Mr. Cuomo has made no secret of his respect for Mr. Perot and has taken several
steps to endear himself to Perot supporters. He has called repeatedly for a
state constitutional convention, a populist vehicle that could circumvent the
Legislature to change the state's election laws. Last week he met at length with
a delegation of Perot supporters.

The Governor was not scheduled to meet with Mr. Perot during his visit to the
state, said his press secretary, Anne W. Crowley.

The Loss of Jobs

Mr. Perot dedicated a large portion of his speeches today to the trade
agreement, which he called the "Mexican trade agreement." After remarking on the
tens of thousands of jobs lost in New York in the last year because of layoffs
by Eastman Kodak and I.B.M., Mr. Perot said the agreement would lead to huge
losses of American jobs to Mexico.

"I cannot find it in my heart that it is proper to take your job to a country
just because they want the job and it might help the country, but it would
destroy our country," said Mr. Perot, who is about to publish a book on the
subject.

Mr. Perot also bemoaned the country's widening trade deficit.

"Right now, the two principal exports out of New York Harbor are scrap steel and
scrap paper going to Japan," he said. "They go right past the Statue of Liberty,
the beacon to the world. Those raw materials come back to our country as
Japanese autos, and the paper is made into corrugated boxes into which they put
their sophisticated consumer electronics.  "This has not happened because the
American worker is dumb, stupid, lazy or unproductive. This has happened because
of the way our Government has mismanaged trade over the years."

The same themes were touched at Stony Brook tonight, with about 5,000 people
attending.

The loss of manufacturing jobs in the country, Mr. Perot said there, constituted
a military as well as economic threat.

"We cannot defend this great country unless we can manufacture," he said. "Can
you imagine what would happen if we had to go to the rest of the world and ask
for materials?"

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot held a 90-minute rally early yesterday in downtown
Syracuse. He spoke about topics including Congressional benefits, lobbyists, the
North American Free Trade Agreement and the economy. Mr. Perot also promoted two
of his books. He greeted Ryan McIntyre after the rally. (Michael J. Okoniewski
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
From Dr. Welby to Dr. Giggles, a Steep Slide

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1995 words


The blood of budget battles washed from his hands, President Clinton is finally
focused on health-care reform and promises a sweeping package of proposals
sometime around the autumnal equinox. But if recent movies and television shows
are any indication, the nation's medical system needs more than a Government
action plan to salvage its reputation. It needs more than managed competition or
a single-payer system to make people trust the health-care business again.

What medicine really needs is a delicious blockbuster of a movie about a doctor
who is not evil or arrogant or lewd or avaricious. It needs a film in which
nurses are neither ditsy and sexy nor imperious and sadistic. A television show
about a hospital in which the right operations are done on the right people at
the right time, and the ailments of the system do not exceed those of the
patients. A hard-working, soft-spoken hero who battles life-threatening illness,
not a malevolent bureaucracy.

Medicine needs those things, but what does it get? It gets "The Fugitive," the
new movie in which Harrison Ford plays a surgeon wrongfully accused of murdering
his wife, who escapes en route to prison and discovers that his greatest enemy
is not the United States marshal determined to hunt him down but the bottomless
greed of his fellow health- care providers.

It gets Donald Sutherland as an alcoholic, foul-tempered, womanizing physician
in "Dr. Bethune," scheduled for release in September. It gets the starchy,
reserved physicians, more concerned with the arcane protocols of science than
their young patients' welfare, in last year's "Lorenzo's Oil." It gets Jeremy
Irons playing demented, drug-addicted twin physicians in David Cronenberg's
"Dead Ringers," a 1988 movie that encapsulates a woman's worst nightmares about
male gynecologists. It gets Larry Drake, best known as Benny in "L.A. Law," as
the outrageously homicidal title character in the 1992 gasher film "Dr.
Giggles." (While carving out a victim's heart, he says, "If you think that's
bad, wait till you get my bill.")

Indeed, the most appealing physician on a screen these days predates not only
such mythic M.D.'s of yesteryear as Dr. Kildare but the entire century: Jane
Seymour playing the healing flower of the Old West in the CBS series "Dr. Quinn,
Medicine Woman."

Doctors have long been screen staples, for the simple reason that medicine and
its assured life-or-death moments are the natural stuff of high drama. But the
depiction of the health-care business has changed radically in recent years, and
right now it is suffering from an excess of bad press.

"The role of the physician in movies and on television has mirrored the role he
or she has assumed in society," said Robin Cook, the author of medical thrillers
like "Coma," "Brain" and "Fever" and a physician by training. "In the 60's, you
had Dr. Ben Casey, who was an all-knowing individual, gruff but altruistic. Then
came Marcus Welby, who never seemed to send out a bill and whose very name
conjures up images of all being well.

"But when we began questioning our supposed experts in society, doctors fell out
of favor," said Mr. Cook. "And there's a sense that a lot of doctors have been
extremely greedy, operating on their own agenda rather than on what the public
needs."

Yet the rocky course of physicians on film is more complicated than a mere
transfiguration of icons into fiends. And in some ways the ambivalence
surrounding popular images of medicine reflects the ambivalence people feel
toward those who minister to them when they are most vulnerable.

In one popular contemporary theme, the self-centered, aloof doctor undergoes
midcourse sensitivity training and is redeemed.  In the 1991 film "The Doctor,"
William Hurt is a callous cowboy of a surgeon who scoffs at his patients'
whimpers for emotional support, until he is diagnosed with throat cancer and
realizes how scared and alone he feels. A patient (Elizabeth Perkins) with an
inoperable brain tumor aids him in his enlightenment. Here, the patient, not the
physician, is the wise one -- an idea in keeping with the patients' rights
movement that first gained power in the mid-1980's.

"The movie shows surgeons who have such extraordinary technical competence that
they don't have to develop any other aspect," said Anne Hudson Jones, a
professor of literature and medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch
in Galveston. "The film captures the sense that many people have of how
dehumanized and dehumanizing the system has become."

In other examples, the doctor is dedicated and compassionate but the system is
rotten. Mr. Ford in "The Fugitive" is a Good Samaritan type who runs afoul of
corrupt peers and the dependably fetid pharmaceutical industry. In the 1991
movie "Awakenings," Robin Williams wants desperately to give patients suffering
from postencephalitic Parkinsonism doses of the experimental drug L-dopa, but
the hospital administration tries at every step to block his plan.

In "Article 99," a well-intentioned if flat-footed 1992 film about disorder in a
Veterans Administration hospital, Ray Liotta and Kiefer Sutherland play
streetwise but idealistic young physicians reduced to stealing essential
surgical items from the supply room because the unscrupulous, tightwad hospital
director has rationed goods with not a thought for patient needs.

The little guy bucking the system is a Hollywood standard, of course, but in the
case of doctor movies, the motif reveals a conviction many Americans seem to
have that the system may be bad but their personal doctor is a saint.

"It's a real dichotomy," said Mr. Cook. "People express negative feelings about
doctors as a group, but are very loyal to their own doctors."

THE DESANCTIFYING OF the medical profession has followed Americans' gradual
disillusionment with technology and paternalism in general. When doctors first
showed up on film, very early in the industry's history, attitudes toward
progress and authority were largely positive.

In D. W. Griffith's 1911 short "The Country Doctor," a physician leaves his
ailing son's bedside to treat a supposedly sicker patient, only to return and
find his son dead -- proof of the enormous sacrifices a doctor must make. And
while evil scientists quickly became a movie cliche, doctors were usually
demigods struggling to apply scientific advances for the betterment of humanity.
In the 1940 film "Dr. Ehrlich's Magic Bullet," Edward G. Robinson plays the
German immunologist Paul Ehrlich as a pioneer who, through super human
persistence, developed a cure for syphilis.

"Medicine between the turn of the century and the 1940's had made tremendous
strides," said David E. Tanner, an assistant professor of English and the
humanities at the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Allied Health Sciences
in Boston, who has studied the role of doctors in the movies. "There was a sense
of how science, technology and medicine had been improving our lives, and people
were willing to accept and respect that."

That effervescent view of the future continued into the early 1960's, accounting
in part for classic doctor-hero series like "Dr. Kildare," "Ben Casey" and
"Marcus Welby, M.D." In the 1960's television series "The Fugitive," on which
the new movie is based, not only was Dr. Richard Kimble a selfless hero, but
there were no villainous doctors to oppose him.

With the Vietnam War, idols in many professions toppled from their pedestals,
and the medical establishment began to be seen not as the source of progress but
of deception, greed and power-mongering. Most emblematic of the transformation
was Robert Altman's 1970 movie "M*A*S*H," which, though nominally about the
Korean War two decades before, conveyed the chaos and smirking irreverence of
the 1960's.  "The image of the doctor in control," said Ms. Hudson Jones of the
University of Texas, "gave way to anti-war, anti-authoritarian cutups."

The breakthrough doctor movie of the era was "The Hospital," written by Paddy
Chayevsky, directed by Arthur Hiller and starring Diana Rigg and George C.
Scott. The 1971 film, about chaos at a city hospital, was outrageously madcap
but so trenchant that many of the issues with which it grappled remain relevant.
A petty bureaucrat demands insurance information from a patient who is already
dead, another man dies unnoticed in the emergency room, the wrong patient
receives a barium enema, and there are neighborhood clashes over the hospital's
attempts to evict tenants in nearby public housing.

"We can almost clone people like carrots, and yet half the kids in the ghetto
haven't been inoculated," says the chief of medicine, played by Mr. Scott. The
remark still applies. "This is a Gothic horror story," he says of the hospital,
a symbol of "the whole wounded madhouse of our times."

After "The Hospital," the iconoclastic spirit picked up steam. In the 1978 film
version of Mr. Cook's book "Coma," Genevieve Bujold, a young surgeon, discovers
a conspiracy by the hospital to harvest organs for profit from unwilling donors.
In the 1975 film "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest," the mental patients are the
truly sane, and the health-care professionals, typified by Nurse Ratched (Louise
Fletcher), are just short of Waffen S.S.

As poorly as doctors have fared on film, nurses have done much worse. Said Lucy
Fisher, professor of film studies at the University of Pittsburgh, who has
examined the history of nurses in the movies: "The images have tended to veer
from the sexpot, like Hot Lips Houlihan in 'M*A*S*H,' to the terrifying,
controlling mother figure in 'Cuckoo's Nest.' "

About the best that nurses can expect, said Ms. Fisher, is to be shown as gentle
helpmeets to doctors, like the nurse (played by Julie Kavner) who dates and
sides with Robin Williams's character in "Awakenings."

For all the punishment physicians have taken on screen, some intriguingly
humanizing themes have emerged. As their patina of invulnerability has begun to
wear away, doctors have been shown as flawed, uncertain and ultimately
sympathetic characters, particularly on television series like "M*A*S*H" (based
on the film) and "St. Elsewhere."

"There's been a fascinating switch from focusing on patients to focusing on
physicians," said Joseph Turow of the University of Maryland and author of
"Playing Doctor: Television, Storytelling and Medical Power." "Suddenly it's the
physicians in the show who are having the problems rather than the patients."

One reason for highlighting doctors' personal predicaments, he said, was the
networks' desire to attract an upwardly mobile, professional audience concerned
mostly with its own melodramas. By the time shows like "Doogie Howser, M.D." and
"Northern Exposure" came around, the doctors' vocation seemed incidental
compared with details like inordinate youth or the cultural discordance between
a big-city Jewish boy and life in a tiny Alaskan town.

Hollywood has tackled with surprising sophistication a few of the newest trends
in America's thistly relationship with medicine. In "Lorenzo's Oil," a couple
with no scientific background wrests control over their son's illness from a
sluggish medical establishment, as an increasing number of Americans turn to
alternative therapies after conventional healing has failed them. Yet movies and
television continue to present stories about acute illnesses, emergencies and
crises amenable to a quick fix, said Mr. Turow, while ignoring chronic diseases
like AIDS and cancer, which increasingly define our real medical landscape.

Ms. Hudson Jones points out that the film industry has yet to take on the
reigning demons in medicine: unequal access to health care and the skyrocketing
costs of health insurance. Such seemingly desiccative subjects may soon find
breath in Robin Cook's novel "Fatal Cure," scheduled for publication in January.
Its topic is the darling of the health-policy set: managed competition.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 5, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article on Aug. 22 about doctors in the movies misstated the affiliation of
Joseph Turow. He is a professor at the University of Pennsylvania, not the
University of Maryland.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Harrison Ford in "The Fugitive" as Dr. Kimble -- He's a good
Samaritan, but check out the evil pharmaceutical company and the corrupt doctors
around him. (Stephen Vaughan/Warner Brothers)(pg. 9); George C. Scott and Diana
Rigg in "The Hospital" (1971) -- So trenchant its issues remain relevant. (Movie
Still Archives); Louise Fletcher and Jack Nicholson in "One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest" (1975) -- A nurse just short of Waffen S.S. (Movie Still
Archives)(pg. 14); Marcus Welby (Robert Young), above, conjured up well-being;
the more recent "The Doctor" (William Hurt) was a callous cowboy of a surgeon.
(CBS); In "Lorenzo's Oil" (1992), Nick Nolte, Zack O'Malley and Susan Sarandon
fought against the doctors. (pg. 15)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Poet's Life, Fulfilled in Words and on an Inner Stage

BYLINE: By MARGO JEFFERSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words



Philip Larkin
A Writer's Life
By Andrew Motion
Illustrated. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. 570 pages. $35.

Poetry demands talent and extends fair and equal opportunity to all
temperaments. If you need deprivation, not daffodils, to spur you into song, so
be it. The lucid beauty of a Grecian urn will become the ugly beauty of "motor
oil, cuts of salmon" and "shining gull-marked mud." "Love bade me welcome, yet
my soul drew back" can give way to "Love again: wanking at ten past three/ . . .
And the usual pain, like dysentery." And a darkling thrush, caroling "Some
blessed Hope" can disappear into "the deep blue air, that shows/Nothing, and is
nowhere. . . ." You will be Philip Larkin then, not Wordsworth, Keats, George
Herbert or Thomas Hardy, and you will have won your laurel as a fine, exacting
poet who left his mark on British and American poetry between the end of the
Second World War and the close of the Vietnam War.

Philip Larkin's collected poems come to just over 300 pages; Andrew Motion's
biography of Larkin comes to over 500 (standard biography length nowadays, it
seems, whether your subject is Oscar Wilde or Frank Capra). Mr. Motion taught at
the University of Hull, where Larkin was the chief librarian for a
quarter-century; he is one of his literary executors, and he conducts us through
the life with all the worthy, useful and at times stultifying detail one
supposes Larkin used when guiding his employees through the library stacks and
card catalogue. He is right to say that Larkin's temperament "stopped him
leading a life much diversified by event"; right, too, to say that he "lived a
much more dramatic and intense life than he let on, though it was performed on
an inner stage rather than before the wide world."

Mr. Motion has been rapped on the knuckles for showing Larkin at his worst (sour
and mean-spirited), page after page. But that's far from all we see. That's also
what can happen when a life racked by thought and feeling but not "much
diversified by event" is rendered by a biographer who has a scholar's respect
for precision but lacks a novelist's sense of form. "Life is first boredom, then
fear/Whether or not we use it, it goes," he wrote in 1963, and while that's not
the whole truth, it's not an untruth either. Larkin wrote it, and Mr. Motion
shows it. He does admire Larkin's gifts enormously, and he does let us see the
disparate elements that marked his inner life: the strong will and the timidity;
the passions and the phobias; the wit, the bile, the unhappiness; the charm, the
self-pity, the yearning and the misanthropy.

Philip Larkin was born in 1922 and died in 1985. He grew up in Coventry,
England, a city known for its cathedral and its Daimler motor-car factory. His
father, the city treasurer, was efficient, hard-working and a bully. His mother,
the housewife, was docile, anxious and ineffectual.  "What kind of home did they
create?" he wrote years later. "I should say it was dull, pot-bound and slightly
mad . . .  I don't think my father liked working . . . I don't think my mother
liked keeping house. I don't think my sister liked living at home. Yet they all
seemed powerless to do anything about it. . . . Certainly the marriage left me
with two convictions: that human beings should not live together, and that
children should be taken from their parents at an early age."

He wasn't able to manage any kind of escape until he turned 18 and went off to
Oxford. And there he began to find a self and a style. He became a bookish
dandy: bow tie, waistcoat and green or cerise trousers transforming the boy who
had had a weak back, a stammer and thick eyeglasses. He gave his heart to an
earlier generation of British modernists (Lawrence, Mansfield, Woolf and Auden);
likewise to an earlier generation of American jazz musicians (Bechet,
Beiderbecke, Armstrong and Ellington). He was worldly about art, savvy about
friendship, frightened and irritated by sex and women. "Everything about the
ree-lay-shun-ship between men and women makes me angry," he wrote his friend
Kingsley Amis. "It might have been planned by the army or the Ministry of Food."
And, "Oh dear, I do despise those bachelors such as I am qualified to be classed
among," he wrote his lover, Monica Jones: "uneasy jovial selfish mum-loving
compensated crew." If I were putting together an anthology to be called "Life
Between the Sexes in Britain: 1940-1963," I would place such letters, journals
and poems by Larkin right next to some of Doris Lessing's more scathing stories.
The two of them might come to blows about the causes, but they record the
effects with harrowing like-mindedness.

By 1947, when he was just four years out of Oxford, the pattern of Larkin's life
was set. He was a librarian. He had met Monica Jones, the professor of English
who would remain at the center or at the sidelines of his life until it ended.
He had published his only two novels and the first of his four books of poetry.
As a librarian, he would go on to make the University of Hull's resources
distinguished, not simply functional. As a poet, he would go from being
appreciated to being known to being famous: one of the best of a group of
writers (Amis, Iris Murdoch and Donald Davie among them) praised for their
toughness and bite. "I feel we have got the method right," he said. "Plain
language, absence of posturings, sense of proportion, humour. . . ." We are
still waiting, he added, for "the matter: a fuller and more sensitive response
to life as it appears from day to day. . . ."

The last years are the bleakest. He thought he looked like "an egg sculpted in
lard, with goggles on." He was under siege by drink, deafness and depression.
Fame was good for his pride, but hard on his nerves. More and more poems went
unfinished or unpublished, while his twin themes, love's treachery and death's
finality, became a torment, "a sort of Bluebeard's Chamber" in the mind. Larkin
had always defined himself as much by what he hated as by what he loved, but now
his weapons were rusty and lame. England's loss of power must mean she was about
to become "a sort of sub-Ireland" or "a satellite Soviet state." The works of
Picasso, Ezra Pound and Charlie Parker were "irresponsible exploitations of
technique in contradiction of human life as we know it." Larkin the poet knew
that art required the most "delicate listening," and his poems with their
sorrows and blasphemies, kept that faith. Larkin the pundit turned into a hack,
and a mind is a terrible thing to waste. But as you read this life of Larkin the
writer, which needs shaping but steadily gathers force, you will find yourself
turning back (or forward) to his real work. There, he was listening right to the
end.

Keeping the soul unjostled,

The pocket unpicked,

The fancies lurid,

And the treasure buried.

NAME: Philip Larkin

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Philip Larkin, photographed in 1943, in Wellington Square,
Oxford. (Bruce Montgomery/Farrar, Straus & Giroux)(pg. C11); Andrew Motion (Jan
Dalley)(pg. C14)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton and Kennedys: In 30 Years, a Full Circle

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: EDGARTOWN, Mass., Aug. 24


Thirty years ago, Bill Clinton the boy stood staring at John F. Kennedy, his
hero, in the White House Rose Garden.  Today, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and
other members of the family welcomed Bill Clinton the President to the seas off
the Massachusetts coast that his murdered predecessor loved so well.

The Kennedys, who give New England the nearest the nation comes to royalty,
turned out in force to escort Mr. Clinton, his wife, Hillary, and their
daughter, Chelsea, on a nearly five-hour luncheon cruise out of Menemsha Harbor
toward the red clay bluffs of Gay Head at Martha's Vineyard's western tip.

Reminders of the glamour that Presidential visits used to bring to this region
were everywhere. Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, who sailed with her father as a
little girl, was a member of the party that greeted Mr. Clinton and chatted
easily with the President as the vessel returned to Menemsha Harbor this
afternoon.

But if the brisk wind and bright sun stirred memories of Camelot, there were
also reminders of how fleeting political dreams can be.

Echoes of Earlier Times

A few miles away on the other side of the island is Chappaquiddick Creek, where
Senator Edward M. Kennedy's Presidential aspirations all but ended with the
drowning of Mary Jo Kopechne in July 1969.

Adding to the swirl of conflicting memories has been the President's decision to
stay at the Oyster Bay home of Robert S. McNamara, who as Secretary of Defense
under Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson played an important role in prosecuting the
Vietnam War that Mr. Clinton would later work so hard to avoid.

Swathed in a red-and-white polka dot scarf and wearing sunglasses, Mrs. Onassis,
the official hostess for the outing on the 70-foot yacht Relemar, remained
mostly out of camera range as the Clintons arrived. The vessel is owned by Mrs.
Onassis's longtime friend Maurice Tempelsman, who joined Senator Kennedy in
greeting the Clintons as they arrived.

The Clintons, the Kennedys and their friends ate their lunch on board, anchored
off Pasque Island in Buzzard's Bay.

Also present were Mrs. Schlossberg's husband, Edwin; Mr. Kennedy's wife,
Victoria, and Vernon E. Jordan, the Washington lawyer with whom the President
has been golfing during his holiday here, and his wife, Anne. The atmosphere
appeared festive, as Mr. Clinton, who has devoted much of his political career
to casting himself as a Southern apostle of John F. Kennedy, stepped aboard.

Cultivating Kennedy Link

"Hello, welcome to Massachusetts," Senator Kennedy called out to Mr. Clinton as
he arrived to the cheers of several hundred spectators.

"Glad to be here," Mr. Clinton responded.

Indeed. Unlike most recent Presidents, Mr. Clinton has done much to honor and
emulate President Kennedy. On the day before he was sworn into office in
January, he traveled to Arlington National Cemetery to visit the graves of John
and Robert F. Kennedy and with members of the Kennedy family put white roses
there.

The Kennedys have hardly seemed to mind. Both Senator Kennedy and his nephew
Joseph, a Representative from Massachusetts, have supported Mr. Clinton's
initiatives in Congress. And Mrs. Onassis has attended at least two private
dinners for the Clintons since they arrived here last week. During the campaign,
she held a luncheon for Mrs. Clinton.

As he has consciously tried to emulate the vigor of President Kennedy, Mr.
Clinton has been aided by youth. Mr. Clinton was 46 when he was inaugurated; Mr.
Kennedy was 43. Mr. Clinton has also recalled on multiple occasions how he was
moved to choose a career in public service after he met Mr. Kennedy in a Rose
Garden ceremony as a delegate to Boys' Nation in 1963.

Perfect Day for Boating

His mother has said that he decided he would be President that day.

The weather today was perfect for boating. For Mr. Clinton, who lacks a winter
home, a summer home and a boat, this 10-day trip to Martha's Vineyard was as
close as he will probably come this summer to getting away from it all.

By the time Mr. Clinton returned to shore in the late afternoon, he had changed
out of the preppy open-neck polo shirt he wore in the morning into a T-shirt
inscribed with the initials of the Democratic Leadership Council, the
organization of centrist Southerners who helped elect him by wresting the
Democratic Party away from the liberal theories Senator Kennedy had espoused.

He declared that he had a "wonderful" time, and there was much joshing about the
trouble Mr. Tempelsman apparently had while docking his cruiser.

Mrs. Onassis, who had shed her concealing scarf for a jaunty baseball cap by the
time the boaters returned, had nothing to add.

Later Mrs. Onassis and Mr. Templesman joined the Clintons for dinner at the
Outermost Inn, a Gay Head restaurant owned by Hugh Taylor, the brother of the
singer James Taylor.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. Julius Wishner, 72, A Psychology Professor

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


Dr. Julius Wishner, emeritus professor of psychology at the University of
Pennsylvania, died on Sunday at Bryn Mawr Hospital. He was 72.

Professor Wishner, who lived in Haverford, Pa., had been ill for a long time,
the university said.

Dr. Wishner was a specialist in psychopathology and schizophrenia, and his most
recent research sought to show that the root disorder in schizophrenia can be
traced to faults in the way the schizophrenic mind processes information.

He interrupted his education at Brooklyn College to serve in World War II as a
navigator and first lieutenant in the Army Air Forces, where he won the
Distinguished Flying Cross. After the war he graduated from Brooklyn College,
and received a Ph.D. from Northwestern University in 1950.

He joined the Penn faculty as an instructor in 1949 and became a full professor
in 1963. From 1974 to 1980, Dr. Wishner was a professor of psychiatry at the
University of Pennsylvania Medical School. He retired from the psychology
department two years ago.

Dr. Wishner served as president of the faculty senate at Penn from 1965 to 1967,
when there were protests over reports that secret projects involving the Vietnam
War were being conducted on the campus. He was credited with guiding the
university toward a policy that calmed the protests by barring secret research
on the campus.

He is survived by his wife of 52 years, the former Dorothy Busker; two
daughters, Amy Wishner of Philadelphia and Prof. Karen Wishner of Narragansett,
R.I., and a grandson.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Youth and Optimism In the 90's

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


Each decade the memories become more vague, but with the release of new papers
on the Kennedy assassination and this weekend's 30th anniversary observance of
the March on Washington, 1963 is again in the news.

Roger Staubach, the Navy quarterback, was supposed to have been on the cover of
Life magazine that last week in November, but his photo had to be pulled and
replaced by a portrait of the slain President.

Daisy Bates, a civil rights leader from Little Rock, Ark., recalled in a recent
magazine interview that she was the person scheduled to address the crowd at the
Lincoln Memorial immediately after Dr. Martin Luther King's "I Have a Dream"
speech.

"They were applauding so wildly," said Ms. Bates. "No one could hear me. No one
was listening to me. . . . At the end of my two minutes, I realized that no one
heard a word I said."

It was an extraordinary time. The transition from the 50's to the 60's was
accelerating but was not yet complete. Miniskirts, flower children, the big
Vietnam buildup, black power -- they were all still in the future. In 1963, the
baby boomers were in the early stages of their extended adolescence. They would
be heard from shortly.

The turmoil was already under way. The civil rights leader Medgar Evers was shot
to death in Jackson, Miss. Four black girls -- three teen-agers and an
11-year-old -- were killed when the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham,
Ala., was bombed. And Americans were astonished by photos of a Buddhist monk who
had set himself aflame to protest the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem in Saigon.

Nevertheless, it was a great time to be young. More youngsters than ever were
graduating from high school and going on to college. The economy was surging.
Jobs were plentiful. Political leadership was young and exciting and pointing
toward a glorious future. We were putting men into space and sending young
people abroad in the Peace Corps. Optimism ruled.

Even the bloodshed of the civil rights movement was seen in a positive light.
The victims were martyrs, the mourned but necessary casualties of the
increasingly successful battle for justice and equality.

When protesters locked arms and sang "We Shall Overcome," there was never any
doubt in their minds that they would. You had to be weird in those days to
believe that progress was not a permanent state of affairs.

Thirty years later young people still manage to be optimistic, but it's harder
now. In 1993, you can come out of college laden with degrees and still have to
struggle to find work.

"I have to stay in school because there are no jobs available," says Jack
Mortell, a senior at the University of Hartford who hopes to go on to law
school.

Nevertheless, when asked if he is optimistic, he replies, "Yes, very."

Sean Downs, a senior at Baruch College in Manhattan, says: "I have it worse than
my parents. They got married young, mom didn't work and they bought a house at
the age of 25. I doubt I'll even buy a new car by then."

But is he optimistic?

Oh yes. "Because I won't stop until I get what I want."

Optimism may be more essential now than ever. In the inner cities, young people
whose futures were supposed to have been assured by the successes of the civil
rights movement are faced with the daily bloodshed of life in the neighborhood.
As they dodge bullets, fend off drug dealers and attend the funerals of their
peers, inner-city youngsters have to draw on exceptional reserves of optimism
just to imagine making it into adulthood.

As for political leadership, young people seem profoundly unimpressed. A
representative view was expressed by Joanne Dionisu, a 24-year-old financial
analyst from Paramus, N.J.: "I feel our political leaders are not competent and
that they are out to help themselves and their own careers, forgetting about the
major issues facing the country."

Creative approaches to the enormous problems of the 1990's seem to be in short
supply. But young people are weird; they don't need reasons to be optimistic.

In the 1960's, it was the young people -- fired by energy and enthusiasm and
optimism -- who rose up and took the country in a new direction.

Perhaps it will be the same in the 90's.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Why the Marines Declared War on Marriage;
Unauthorized Wife

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Answer to a Marine Chaplain's Prayer" by Bernard E. Trainor (Op-Ed, Aug.
13):

In December 1966, after my return to the United States from my first tour of
duty in Vietnam at age 19, I married my childhood sweetheart. After a brief
honeymoon I reported to my assigned duty station, Camp LeJeune, N.C., determined
to obtain housing and have my young bride join me. After reporting in, I went to
the company First Sergeant -- as best as I recall, the dialogue was:

ME: Excuse me, Top, how can I get base housing for me and my wife?

FIRST SGT.: You want what? Where did you get a wife?

ME: What do you mean "where" -- from Brooklyn, where we live.

SGT.: Son, did the Marine Corps approve or authorize this wife?

ME: What?

SGT.: Boy, if the Marine Corps wanted you to have a wife, they would have issued
you one! The corps takes care of its own.

ME: Look, Top, I'm married, and I need some housing.

SGT.: Son, you got this wife, the corps did not issue, approve or authorize this
procurement. So it is your responsibility -- not the corps'. Dismissed!

We moved into a base trailer park with other young enlisted couples, and all was
in the tradition of esprit de corps.

ROBERT L. RAPHAEL
Brooklyn, Aug. 16, 1993
The writer served in the Marine Corps, 1964-72.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Press Is Tough on Democratic Presidents

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


To the Editor:

Your Aug. 13 front-page news analysis of Vincent W. Foster Jr.'s suicide states,
"It defies credibility to suggest that the Clinton Administration has taken
anything resembling the pounding from political opponents or from the news media
that other Administrations have endured." You note that President Johnson's term
after the 1964 election was crippled by the Vietnam War and that President
Nixon's second term was cut short by the Watergate scandal.

In 1963, shortly before President Kennedy's assassination, I was teaching high
school, and a student asked me why the attacks on Kennedy were so vicious. "I
don't know," I replied. "I guess the Republicans just play rougher than the
Democrats do." I was unhappy with that answer for lack of balance, but I have
not been able to come up with a better one.

Presidents Truman, Kennedy and now Clinton were attacked viciously from the
beginning. What has President Clinton done to engender the hatred and contempt
directed against him? What did Kennedy and Truman do? The purpose of the
campaign against them was to forestall action from the start.

President Johnson, by contrast, received a free ride at first because of the
Kennedy assassination. He gained the legislative victories attributed to his
political skills largely by wrapping himself in the mantle of the martyred
President. Both Johnson and Richard Nixon were treated well enough by the press
and opposition to win election landslides. The hatred subsequently directed at
Johnson and the contempt toward President Nixon resulted from what they did.

Of course, the entire press is not engaged in a conscious campaign to destroy
Democratic Presidents. But those who are set the tone, and the rest seek to
prove they are every bit as tough. The result is an imbalance in reporting that
has long favored the political right.

WILLIAM A. BAKER
Bloomfield, N.J., Aug. 13, 1993

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

State Dept. Balkan Aides Explain Why They Quit

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 25


It was the kind of gut-wrenching cable that came across Jon Western's State
Department desk every day for almost a year: a 9-year-old Muslim girl raped by
Serbian fighters, then left in a pool of blood while her parents watched
helplessly from behind a fence for two days before she died.

"This was pretty indicative of the type of things we were getting on a daily
basis," Mr. Western said.

It was the kind of cable that led Mr. Western earlier this month to quit his job
as an Eastern Europe analyst out of frustration with what he considered
America's lack of resolve in solving the Bosnian crisis.

"The whole thing has been very demoralizing and very depressing," said Mr.
Western, a soft-spoken man whose boyish features belie his age of 30. "I found
myself walking home every night just angry and bitter. My wife could tell you of
my large mood swings. You can't read through the accounts of atrocities on a
daily basis, add them up and see what's happening and not be overwhelmed. It
calls into question your morality."

Mr. Western is one of four mid-level staff members who have quit the State
Department in the past year to protest United States policy toward the conflict
in the former Yugoslavia, saying they could no longer countenance a policy they
feel rewards Serbian aggression.

Malaise Over the Balkans

The four said in interviews today that their actions were symbolic of a larger
malaise within the State Department over America's policy on the Balkans.

"The dissent is not confined to the European bureau," said Mr. Western. "I've
covered or been associated with the Yugoslav issue since the outbreak of
hostilities. In my time, I have met one, possibly two people, in the department
below the level of assistant secretary who believe in the policy."

Stephen Walker, the Croatian desk officer who resigned this week, also said that
anger with the policy toward Bosnia runs deep. After word swept the building
that he too was quitting, Mr. Walker said he was approached by numerous
colleagues "who said they agreed with my frustrations with the policy."

Three of the dissidents -- Mr. Western, Mr. Walker, and George Kenney, who quit
last year -- spoke in a joint interview today about their experiences at the
State Department and about why they oppose current American policy towards
Bosnia. A fourth, Marshall Harris, a one-time leader of the dissidents at the
State Department, could not attend the group session, but was interviewed later
by telephone.

'A Certain Luxury'

The three who quit recently said they feel that others would resign if it were
not for family responsibilities. "The four of us are young," said Mr. Western.
"That affords a certain luxury of being able to make the jump. We don't have all
the commitments and responsibilities to family. We're not 20 years into a
career."

"We don't have kids going off to college," said Mr. Walker, 30.

State Department officials reacted testily when Mr. Harris quit, the first of
the most recent spate of resignations. Some officials emphasized Mr. Harris's
youth and low ranking in the department and suggested that he was quitting
because he was not involved more in policy making. Such comments caused anger
within the State Department and after the resignations of Mr. Western and Mr.
Walker, State Department officials have gone out of their way to say that
resignation is an honorable form of protest.

Dissent within the Government's foreign policy apparatus over high-profile and
contentious issues is nothing new, and neither are such resignations. Cyrus R.
Vance quit as Secretary of State in 1980 to show his disagreement over President
Carter's decision to attempt to rescue American hostages in Iran. Anthony Lake,
the present National Security Advisor, was one of 10 National Security Council
staff members who resigned in 1969 and 1970 over the Vietnam War.

But, virtually everyone at the State Department agrees that there has not been
such public protests by those given the task of carrying out a policy since the
height of the Vietnam War.

Administration Criticized

"This Administration has used and manipulated the media and public opinion on
Bosnia," Mr. Harris said, "and so we should not hesitate to do protest so
publicly and make our views heard."

Ironically, the resignations come at a time when even they admit that the State
Department under Mr. Christopher has become more open in allowing staff members
to express dissenting views than during the tenure of former Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d, who virtually cut out the Department's career professionals
from policy making. But the three who just quit say that while they and others
who agree with them can express dissatisfaction internally, there seems to be
little change in the policy.

"My problems were not with the process, or the access," Mr. Walker said. "I felt
that from my position I had sufficient opportunity to voice my opinions, my
frustrations; that the Department has tried to give opportunities to the
professionals to bring up other options. But despite these opportunities that
people have had, it's had little or no affect on policy. And that, I think, has
increased the level of frustration within the Department."

The dissidents cited a news conference given by Mr. Christopher on July 21 as
the low point. While Serbian forces were intensifying their siege of Sarajevo,
the Secretary of State told reporters that the United States was doing all that
it could consistent with its national interest.

The next day, Mr. Walker said, Serbian forces lobbed more than 3,700 artillary
shells into the capital city. "The signal sent to the Serbs was we're doing
everything we can, go ahead, have a good time," Mr. Walker said.

A Specific Alternative

Mr. Kenney was the only one to provide a specific alternative to current policy.

"We should have a clearly stated goal of getting rid of the Serbian government,"
he said. "Just putting an economic embargo and sanctions on them is not going to
do enough. We ought to close our embassy in Belgrade. Cut diplomatic ties. Throw
them definitely out of the U.N. Have Radio Free Europe broadcast into Serbia,
telling the Serbian people, that, hey, you've got a lousy Government, and until
you change it, you're going to suffer."

There were differences in what appeared to be important about American policy
toward Bosnia. Mr. Walker spoke often in broad policy terms, saying the
Administration's inaction would harm American credibility, undermine United
Nations peacekeeping efforts, and lead to a peace settlement that would not
hold. He said it would also set a dangerous precedent for the oppression of
ethnic minorities elsewhere in the world.

"No matter how you look at it, the policy as it stands right now is wrong," he
said. "That's why dissent and frustration is so widespread and consistent."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the past year, four mid-level State Department officials have
resigned, saying they could not countenance a police they feel rewards Serbian
aggression. Three of the four dissidents were interviewed in Washington. From
left were George Kenney, Jon Western, and Stephen Walker. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Acting Army Secretary, Accused Of Shoplifing, Is Placed on Leave

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 371 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 27


The Acting Secretary of the Army, John W. Shannon, was placed on administrative
leave today after being accused of shoplifting, the Army said.

Mr. Shannon was accused of shoplifting a skirt and blouse valued at about $30
from the Army post exchange at Fort Myer, Va., on Thursday, an Army official
official said.

A store detective apprehended Mr. Shannon, who was alone, as he tried to take
the clothing, said an Army spokesman, Col. Steve Rausch.

Mr. Shannon was appointed Acting Secretary, the highest civilian job in the
military service, on Jan. 20 and has been serving pending the nomination and
confirmation of a new Secretary by the Clinton Administration.

An Early Candidate for Job

The Secretaries of the Navy and Air Force have already been confirmed, but a
disagreement between the White House and Defense Secretary Les Aspin over a
choice for the Army job has stalled even a nomination for that position.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Shannon, who is 59, was an early candidate for the
position but was dropped from consideration several months ago.

Colonel Rausch said that Mr. Shannon was taken to the store manager's office
after he was caught and that a military policeman was called. The policeman then
issued Mr. Shannon a citation accusing him of shoplifting and he was allowed to
leave the store.

Colonel Rausch said, "Mr. Shannon went along with the M.P.'s and did not try to
give anyone a hard time."

Colonel Rausch said Mr. Shannon declined to comment.

Immediately after the incident, Mr. Shannon requested administrative leave,
which was granted.

Mr. Shannon, a native of Louisville, Ky., has served since 1989 as the Under
Secretary of the Army, the No. 2 civilian position. In that job, he has been
responsible for the daily management and oversight of Army internal operations,
including training, readiness and mobilization.

A decorated Vietnam War veteran, Mr. Shannon was commissioned as a second
lieutenant in the infantry in 1955 and served 23 years before retiring at the
rank of colonel.

Gen. Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff, has taken over the post of
Acting Secretary of the Army until a replacement is named and confirmed by the
Senate.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

It Was 1968, and Julian Bond Rescued Me

BYLINE: By Kay Raftery;  Kay Raftery is a writer.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


The slap sent me sprawling across the sidewalk, landing on my rear end. My hands
were scraped, my cheek throbbed, blood came out of my nose.

I looked up at a policeman standing over me. Other police ran over to calm him
down and help me up. I stumbled away, around the corner to my hotel. The lobby
was filled with tear gas, stinging my eyes. I groped, trying to find the
elevators. I started to cry.

"Come on," a voice said, "I know a back way." A tall, young man was smiling at
me. "Come on," he said. "You'll be safe."

I looked at the outstretched black hand. I hesitated.

Then I took his hand.

In August of 1968, during the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, when
anti-Vietnam demonstrators amassed to protest the war, "the whole world was
watching" -- and holding its breath.

I was there, 27 years old and the secretary to the Washington bureau chief of
ABC News. For weeks the media had been warned that many anti-war demonstrators
were already in Chicago. Not to worry, we were told. Mayor Richard Daley said
Chicago -- his Chicago -- was prepared. Still, everyone was edgy.

On the evening of Aug. 28, Chicago exploded in riots. I ducked them after work,
heading for a party. It was after 1 A.M. when I got out of the cab at my hotel,
where the police, as usual, were lined up in front of the revolving doors.

When I walked forward, I heard a man call "Stop!" but figured he wasn't talking
to me. My press tags were visible, and I had passed some of these cops every
night for a week. I kept walking. "Stop!" I kept moving. As I reached to push
the door, a hand came up and slapped me across the face.

The black man pulled me along behind him down the smoky hallways. He kept
repeating, "It's O.K., just follow me."

We walked into the hotel kitchen and pressed the buttons of a freight elevator.
I leaned against the wall and looked at him. And looked again. He seemed
familiar. He asked what happened and I told him a cop had smacked me. He got a
wet paper towel from the sink so I could wipe my bloody face.

The elevator came and he helped me on, and pressed the button when I told him my
floor. Then it connected: The face I had seen from the convention hall balcony
that night. The name that had been thrown out as a possible running mate for
Hubert Humphrey. A young state legislator from Georgia. The rising star of the
civil rights movement.

"Hey," I said, "Are you Julian Bond?"

"Yes," he said.

"Well, thanks," I said. I got off the elevator and walked down the hall.

I never saw Julian Bond again.

I followed the highs and lows of his career, and whenever nasty things were said
about him, I could only remember a young black man who had gone out of his way
to help a very upset young white woman who'd been smacked in the face by a white
cop.

And, although it may sound trite, I remembered something else, too. That you
have to look beyond the color of someone's skin to know who is your friend and
who is not.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: August 29, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction
1           1   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.
2       1  55   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3       2   3   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.
4       3   4   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.
5       4  24   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
6       5  20   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.
7       6   7   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.
8      15   2   THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.)
                The second volume of "The Tamuli," a fantasy saga.
9       8  10   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.
10      7  13   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a
                multimillion-dollar fund.
11      9   7   HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $23.)
                Saddam Hussein plots to steal and destroy the Declaration of
                Independence.
12     11  10   CRUEL & UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
                Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed
                for murder.
13 *   13   7   AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (HarperCollins, $23.)
                The plight of a woman whose estranged husband is found murdered
                in her house.
14     10   5   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
                (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a
                surgeon's daughter.
15          7   HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                Americans on a holiday in Italy learn a lot about their
                marriage and themselves.
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction
1       1  55   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.
2       2   7   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.
3       3  16   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4      14   2   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.
5       5  12   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.
6       4  50   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
7       8  37   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Spirituality and everyday life.
8       6  11   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.
9       9   7   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House,
                $17.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
10     10  12   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                and radio commentator.
11      7  10   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
12          1   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior by a novelist and anthropologist.
13     12  28   HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.)
                Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship
                of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
14         10   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton
                professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
15     11  13   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy
                marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1       1   5   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.
2       2   9   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel about diet and nutrition.
3       3  15   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.
4       4  18   A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.)
                Advice for women.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 14, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.  COMING UP DOWN HOME: A Memoir of
a Southern Childhood, by Cecil Brown. (Ecco, $24.95.) Mr. Brown's story,
redolent of the sights and sounds of rural North Carolina at midcentury, tackles
as well the relations, until recently little explored, of black fathers and
sons.
CRAZY IN ALABAMA, by Mark Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor
yet again, but in a novel that pounds every convention of the genre into
submission; not even the dead bodies interfere with the funniness.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children,
by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some
"home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others
believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.)
This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life
defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
FOXFIRE: Confessions of a Girl Gang, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William
Abrahams/Dutton, $21.) A dark and troubled epic of women who revenge themselves
on men, set in the slow-witted 1950's, before female bonding had been
discovered.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS, by Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful
novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp
commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.
SADE: A Biography, by Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A life of
the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness
in his honor, so to speak.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid,
highly literate personal account by a historian who slowly lost his eyesight and
suddenly got it back.
SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories, by Maxine Chernoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Smart,
antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old
ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.
THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's
Digest, by John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly
written history of a single bright idea and the preacher's kids who ran that
idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.
TRANSLATE THIS DARKNESS: The Life of Christiana Morgan, by Claire Douglas.
(Simon & Schuster, $25.) This remarkable woman plumbed the depth of her
unconscious as a member of the Jung circle in the 1920's, discovering, Ms.
Douglas argues, a recognizable protofeminist inside.
THE WRESTLER'S CRUEL STUDY, by Stephen Dobyns. (Norton, $22.95.) Probability has
no place in this entertaining post-modern novel, governed by the presence of a
wrestler's manager who talks and thinks like Nietzsche.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Why Chide Clinton or the Vineyard for His Vacationing There?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 293 words


To the Editor:

"Clinton Among the Swells" (editorial, Aug. 22) is an unfortunate
misrepresentation of Martha's Vineyard, as well as a mindless and snide attack
on President Clinton.

The Vineyard is not only celebrities. The real island population consists of
fishers, farmers, tradespeople and professionals, with large numbers of seasonal
visitors, who come to enjoy its natural beauty and solitude.

The character of the Vineyard can be measured by a glance at the twice-weekly
Vineyard Gazette, which emphasizes the environment, human interest stories of
ordinary local folks, outstanding photography and local business and political
news. Celebrities appear in print on occasions when they have volunteered
themselves for a local cause.

Your reference to Robert McNamara's home as "a compound of grand cottages" is
outrageous. It is a typical Cape Cod shingled house with a very modest guest
house (which the Clintons chose to use) on a quietly beautiful piece of deserted
wetlands. As for Mr. McNamara and his "hawkish" position on the Vietnam War, you
forget that the former Defense Secretary turned against the war and closed his
career with service as head of the World Bank.

As for the President's choice of Martha's Vineyard, why do you think he should
vacation in Arkansas any more than President Dwight Eisenhower should have
played golf in Abilene, Kan.? Should the Clintons choose the South Bronx?

While here, Mr. Clinton has golfed at a public course, not an exclusive private
club. He has mingled with the local folks at the agricultural fair, a bookstore
and an eatery patronized by townspeople. If he went to a private party or two,
that's his right as a private citizen.

STANLEY PANITZ
Chilmark, Mass., Aug. 24, 1993

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Files and Whispers: The C.I.A. Opens Its Safe

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


CAN Americans learn to trust the Central Intelligence Agency?

That is the C.I.A's deep desire and, to that end, it is letting the public see
some bleached bones from the skeletons in its closet. It is the beginning of
what promises to be another set-to in the long struggle between secrecy and
openness at the agency.

Last week, it released thousands of files on the assassination of John F.
Kennedy, which touch upon one of the most embarrassing episodes in its history
-- the recruitment of mobsters to kill Fidel Castro.

Next year, it will make public many of its records on the 1961 Bay of Pigs
invasion, the botched attempt to overthrow Castro; on the 1953 coup in Iran,
which installed Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi; and on the 1954 coup in Guatemala,
which deposed an elected president and installed generations of generals.

The agency says it does not do such things any more, and wants the release of
these files to signify a new era of openness and understanding. But, senior
officials say, winning public trust for an immense secret bureaucracy will take
a change in the agency's culture.

More than anything else, the officials want Americans to understand why they
still need spying after the end of the cold war, even at a cost of roughly $28
billion a year (of which the C.I.A. consumes about a tenth).

"We were so damn secret that we never bothered to tell anybody why we needed a
secret intelligence agency," said one C.I.A. veteran.

The officials think Americans know only the old misdeeds: plotting
assassinations, spying on Americans, running L.S.D. experiments on human guinea
pigs. They want the spooks replaced in the collective consciousness with a more
benign and realistic image, something like a secret news service gathering
global scoops for the President.

Thus these signs of openness:

C.I.A. officers showing up on Capitol Hill to offer public analyses of China and
Cuba. The new director, R. James Woolsey, leading President Clinton on a
semi-public tour of the agency's campus. (Watch for it on Thursday).

And coming soon: open publication of the in-house scholarly journal, "Studies in
Intelligence." The first issue features a first-person account of Iraqi missile
attacks on Tel Aviv during the Gulf War and a gripping saga (originally
published in the 1947 Yearbook of the Norwegian Tourist Association) of a World
War II sabotage operation against a German weapons plant.

And don't miss the forthcoming series of reports on the Soviet threat in the
1950's, whose publication may settle the argument over whether the threat was
inflated by the C.I.A. or its political overseers.

All of which delights historians who have struggled for years to pry facts from
the intelligence factory.

"All of us who research the cold war think it's great," said Melvyn P. Leffler,
a University of Virginia historian. "If the C.I.A. really is opening this
material up, that's real substance, not just symbolism."

The symbolism is not to be underestimated: the act of releasing the documents
may be more significant than what the documents themselves say.

The release follows an eight-year struggle. In 1985, the late C.I.A. director
William J. Casey created a historical review program to declassify and release
the agency's oldest records.

Mining the mountain of documents has been an agonizingly slow task, said John
Lewis Gaddis, a cold war historian on an independent panel overseeing the
process.

"It's been spotty," he said. "The things that have been easiest to declassify
are the things that show the agency in the best light."

Not all the forthcoming records will do so. That, some senior officials have
argued, is all the more reason to let them loose. Though the whole process, they
say, horrifies a sizeable minority of the agency's employees, a majority
approve.

Classified

Last year, Mr. Woolsey's predecessor, Robert M. Gates, observed in a speech that
the phrase "C.I.A. openness" sounded oxymoronic, like bureaucratic efficiency or
jumbo shrimp. But he appointed an "Openness Task Force," that secretly debated
whether the agency should be less secretive.

It issued a secret report in December 1991. The report remained classified for
four months.

Still, Mr. Gates won its release and endorsed its chief recommendation: that the
archival materials to be released soon be published.

To reveal history is a path to public trust, argues David D. Gries, who came of
age as a covert operator in Vietnam and now directs the C.I.A's Center for the
Study of Intelligence and oversees its immense archives.

"A vigorous policy of greater openness, including access to as many old and
current intelligence records as possible, will permit greater accountability to
the public." he writes in "Orbis," a scholarly journal. "The process will
sometimes be painful, but it promises rewards for both the C.I.A. and the
public."

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Small-Time Gold Miners Scrape By

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words

DATELINE: WEAVERVILLE, Calif.


Mickey Rees, an independent gold miner working on the Trinity River, ignores the
people who lean out of their speeding cars to shout mockingly, "Get a job."

But when tourists pull over to photograph him, shirtless and smoking on a
floating dredge the size of a limousine, the 43-year-old miner and Vietnam
veteran takes out binoculars and stares back. Though he may seem like an
anachronism, Mr. Rees says he is not ready to become a souvenir.

Since 1979, when he quit his job as a foreman at a Long Beach construction
company, Mr. Rees has made a living "taking money out of the river," as he and
others call gold mining. But now small-time miners say they fear it is only a
matter of time before they become extinct.

Ever since gold was first discovered here in 1848, it has been part of the
state's folklore, the unofficial natural lottery that people play while on
vacation in Northern California. Those who fall for the grungy romance of a
miner's life and try to eke out a living in the rivers say the pleasure is in
the pursuit, when an ore streak glimmers in the water after a series of barren
days.

Life Style Vanishing

But independent gold miners may be a dying breed. One reason is economics. The
price of gold has gone from above $800 an ounce in 1981 to less than $400 this
year. And although there is still gold to be had by panning and suction-dredge
mining, it becomes more difficult to find as miners move from claim to claim.

What will probably deliver the death blow to the miners' endeavor, however, are
pending changes in state and Federal regulations. State wildlife officials,
concerned about the declining numbers of salmon and steelhead fish in the rivers
of Northern California, may close off portions of the rivers to the miners and
restrict the kinds of machinery they use.

And on the Federal level, legislation has been introduced by Representative Nick
J. Rahall 2d, Democrat of West Virginia, that would force all miners, big and
small, to pay the Government an 8 percent royalty on all the gold they find; now
they only pay taxes on their profits.

Although Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt supports stringent controls of mining,
"he is aware of small miners and wants to take care of them so they are not made
extinct," said Stephanie Hanna, a spokeswoman for the Interior Department.

But as he took a break after a day of work, Mr. Rees said he held out little
hope. "This kind of life is being phased out," he said. "Most of us are broke.
We don't lobby. We don't make money. We don't make anyone else money. We're an
easy target."

Since California's first gold rush, when miners settled counties like Trinity,
the five major rivers and their tributaries in the north have been picked over
twice more, first by Chinese laborers at the turn of the century and then by
people out of work during the Depression.

Since then miners have developed high-tech gold panning methods. Wearing heated
wet suits with sot masks and 60-pound belts, they dive under water and sweep the
river's bedrock with devices called suction dredges. With an eight-inch nozzle
like an underwater vacuum cleaner, they suck up riverbed gravel, which is
flushed over a large grate to separate the gold.

Gold fever usually begins on vacations, and minor successes with a spoon and a
pan can lead to purchases like a small suction dredge, which costs $800. The
bigger dredges, used by the serious miners, cost $10,000.

The number of people mining has declined from 13,000 in 1980 to 5,000 this year.
Some are recreational miners but one-third are working alone or with a partner
trying to make a living finding gold, said Hal Cribbs, a political consultant
working on mining issues in Sacramento. Mr. Cribbs said about 1,500 work on the
rivers year-round.

The serious say river mining is not an easy way to get rich. On good days, a
suction dredger can pull an ounce out of the river, which can get a miner
anywhere from $270 to $370 either at a jewelry store or at a smelting operation.
But weeks can go by when the miner does not hit any gold.

But the miners say the appeal is not the money, but being their own boss and
living with the unexpected.

"There are no assurances," said Mr. Rees, who lives in a 37-foot Ford bus and
earns an average of $10,000 a year. "Your wife has left you, you have lost your
home, your body hurts, all for the hope of finding something."

"It's not the gold," said Lynn Gunn, 38, who has mined for 10 years with her
husband, Dan Morrison. "It's finding the gold."

Rallying Support

Over the past year, Ms. Gunn, who worked as an electrician in Silicon Valley
before mining, has tried to bring the miners' concerns to state and Federal
officials. But she has had little luck in organizing the miners. Spread
throughout Northern California, miners by nature are loners who distrust
government, she said, making it hard to inspire them to come to meetings.

She has produced a pamphlet, The Miners Survival Kit, which recommends greeting
rafters, kayakers and fishermen because "these people vote, and there's more of
them than us." It also asks miners to collect lead, copper and mercury
accumulated in the dredge to present at local public hearings as proof that
dredging actually picks up pollutants from the rivers.

Some miners have decided to stay out of the conflict, hoping that it will go
away. But if it does not, what the miners will do next is unclear. Trinity
County already has 14.7 percent unemployment, five percentage points higher than
the state rate. Many miners talk about leaving the country for South America,
where they say the gold is more plentiful and the regulations are few. Others,
like Mr. Rees, plan to return to the blue-collar jobs they had before they got
gold fever.

Charlie Fitch, who as a ranger for the Forest Service must enforce Federal rules
dealing with issues like the equipment miners can use, says he has found his job
difficult.

'Taking Away Their Dreams'

"Miners are dreamers," Mr. Fitch said. "Those are a tough people to work with
because you are taking away their dreams."

Joe Valdez, 43, who has also been mining in Trinity County for 10 years, said he
got gold fever after panning on weekends while working in Sacramento doing odd
jobs.

"You go in the water, and you don't know if you will come out with $6,000 or
nothing," Mr. Valdez said. Yet, once he finds gold, it loses its appeal. "When
you are in gold, it becomes just a job," he said.

Todd Steele is one of those miners who is resigned to making a career change.
This summer, he and his wife, Jeanne, an artist, are making jewelry with gold
they have already mined instead of looking for more.

"There's something unbeatable about going to a river in the morning and that is
your office," Mr. Steele said. "You fight the weather, you don't know where the
gold is but it is you against yourself and Mother Nature. And that's enough. But
when you have bureaucracies breathing down your neck, that's too much."


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of northwestern California shows the location of Weaverville.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
$725 Million Merger for 2 H.M.O.'s

BYLINE: By MILT FREUDENHEIM

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 610 words


Health Net, the largest for-profit health maintenance organization in
California, said yesterday that it had agreed to merge with Qual Med Inc., a
Colorado-based H.M.O., in a deal that analysts valued at $500 million in stock
plus $225 million in debt.

Roger F. Greaves, chairman of HN Management Holdings Inc., Health Net's parent
company, will share chief executive duties in the merged company with Dr. Malik
M. Hasan, a London-trained neurologist from Pakistan who is Qual Med's chairman.

Mr. Greaves heads a group of 38 Health Net executives who paid $2 million for
all the voting stock and 20 percent ownership last year, when the company was
taken private.

The new company will have 1.2 million H.M.O. members in the hotly contested
California market, which one analyst called "the Vietnam of American health
care" because of the bloody battles for market share.


A 50-to-1 Windfall

Analysts estimated the Health Net executives' stake would be worth $100 million.
But they cannot pocket their 50-to-1 windfall until 1997, under restrictions
imposed last year by the California Commissioner of Corporations.

Dr. Hasan owns 30 percent of Qual Med, which he started in 1985, and will have
10.5 percent of the new company.

Under the merger, which is subject to approval by Federal and California
regulators, each Health Net common share will be exchanged for 3.34 shares of
the new company. Qual Med shares will be exchanged on a 1-for-1 basis.

Qual Med, which is based in Pueblo, Colo., closed yesterday at $15.50, up $1.375
on the New York Stock Exchange.


Lawsuit Is Withdrawn

In a related action yesterday, Qual Med withdrew lawsuits against Health Net's
top executives, whom it had accused of taking the Los Angeles-based company
private last year "at a price below its fair market value" to realize personal
gain.

Health Net "basically said they'd rather switch than fight," said Thomas E.
Hoddap, an analyst at Robertson, Stephens & Company.

Qual Med, which owns H.M.O.'s in six Western states and has managed health care
discount networks in 16 states, had accused Health Net of reneging on a $400
million purchase agreement in July 1992. In a deal approved by the state, Health
Net instead awarded 80 percent ownership, without voting rights, to a new
foundation headed by Mr. Greaves. The Health Net management group obtained 20
percent and all the voting stock.

Because of California restrictions on nonprofit entities converting to
for-profit companies, Health Net endowed the Wellness Foundation with $75
million in cash and $225 million in i.o.u.'s, or $100 million less than what
Qual Med said it had bid.

Mr. Greaves, who declined to confirm analysts' valuations, said Health Net's
customers included "the biggest companies in California."

Many of the accounts are shared with the nonprofit Kaiser health plans, the
country's largest H.M.O., which has five million California members.

Mr. Greaves said the merger would help Health Net follow its customers, many of
whom are fleeing the California recession, to neighboring states where Qual Med
already operates. "With health reform, we have to be bigger and more visible and
multi-state," he said.

Michael M. LeConey, an analyst at RAS Securities, said the merger was "a major
event in the industry." He said Qual Med shareholders were acquiring a company
that had had "pretty uneven earnings" and had been accused of being "a price
cutter." California is "a very tough market," he said.

But Dr. Hasan said that "most of our profits have been coming from California,"
where Qual Med had acquired three Northern California H.M.O.'s.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Battling for Market Share" shows breakdown of client market
share of health maintenance organizations in California for the first quarter of
1993. QualMed had less than 2 percent of the market, or about 174,000 clients.
(Source: Robertson Stephens)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Oil Group

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 72 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 30


Vietnam chose a consortium led by Total S.A. to study the feasibility of
building and operating the country's first oil refinery, with a capacity of
about 130,000 barrels a day, the French oil company said today. Total has a 30
percent stake in the consortium. PetroVietnam owns 30 percent; the Chinese
Petroleum Corporation of Taiwan owns 30 percent, and Chine Investment and
Development, also from Taiwan, owns 10 percent.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
On Being Young, Hot And Literary in the 60's

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 962 words



New York Days
By Willie Morris
396 pages. Little, Brown & Company. $24.95.

The tale of the small-town boy who leaves the provinces for the bright lights of
the big city is a familiar one, told over and over again by successive
generations of writers. It was the subject of Willie Morris's first book, "North
Toward Home," published some 25 years ago, and it's also the subject of his
latest book, "New York Days," a memoir that more or less takes up where "North
Toward Home" left off in the late 60's.

Compared with its predecessor, this chatty, anecdotal volume is downright
effusive in its affection for New York City. "North Toward Home" dealt mainly
with Mr. Morris's youth in Mississippi and Texas, and it came out a few months
after he'd been made editor in chief of Harper's magazine at the callow age of
32. Its final pages were filled with sharp, sometimes biting observations about
the New York intelligentsia, the observations of someone who was still an
outsider, startled by the rudeness and pretensions of the metropolis.

"New York Days," in contrast, deals primarily with the palmy era of Mr. Morris's
tenure as editor of one of the hottest magazines of the day, and it is not only
filled with descriptions of his encounters with the powerful and famous --
Robert F. Kennedy, Leonard Bernstein, George McGovern, Lauren Bacall and Bill
Bradley, among many others -- but it is also animated by a sense of wonderment
at the social and cultural pleasures afforded by the city.

Indeed, the book creates a portrait of New York "at a time in which everyone
seemed to know everyone else and where everything of importance seemed to happen
first," and goes on to rhapsodize about the city's "magic and majesty as
epicenter of the nation and the world, its interlocking literary and cultural
and political and social milieux, its glamorous parties and beautiful women and
dialogue sparkling with adroit repartee, its clever bons mots and full-blooded
lunacies, its teeming adventure and perilous fun, its monumental ambition, its
aura then of idealism and titillation and tempestuous feasibility, the hard work
and the gratification."

For Mr. Morris, New York was a city haunted by literary ghosts, and he
frequently uses their reminiscences and words to flesh out his own. He quotes
William James on the city's nervous emotional temperature, its "permanent
earthquake condition." He quotes Thomas Wolfe on its "swarming chaos and
confusion." And he quotes F. Scott Fitzgerald on its "haunting loneliness" at
twilight, its "racy, adventurous feel" at night.

These writers, of course, were describing a long-ago New York; Mr. Morris is
trying to describe New York in the 60's, a peculiarly anxious decade in which
cultural and social ferment was mixed together with painful political tumult. In
attempting to communicate this anomalous mood, Mr. Morris spends considerable
time describing articles he ran in Harper's -- Norman Mailer on the Democratic
National Convention in Chicago, Seymour Hersh on the My Lai massacre, Alfred
Kazin on the 1967 war in the Middle East -- and he also rehashes, at rather
wearying length, the main events of the decade: the Vietnam War, the Vietnam War
protests, the assassinations of John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy and the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and the killings at Kent State. He doesn't have
anything particularly new to say about any of these events, and his accounts of
them feel both familiar and perfunctory, as though they had simply been added to
the book to lend the narrative historical resonance and weight.

In fact, the liveliest portions of "New York Days" deal not with the big,
momentous events of the 60's but with the smaller, pettier ones that took place
in and around the offices of Harper's. Mr. Morris introduces us to the
magazine's young, gifted staff -- which included the editors Robert Kotlowitz
and Midge Decter, and the reporters David Halberstam, Larry L. King, John Corry
and Marshall Frady -- and he nimbly conjures up the hectic, adrenaline-driven
atmosphere they all thrived on, communicating to the reader what it must have
been like to be young and gifted and ambitious in New York during "those high,
windy, incandescent days" of the late 60's.

Mr. Morris tells us about the staff's passion to create a magazine that "had to
be read," a magazine that would "edify and arouse and entertain." He tells us
about the parties they attended, the joking and banter and late nights at the
office, and the toll it exacted on all of their lives. And, finally, he tells us
about the quick, sad end to their years at Harper's, following a 1971 showdown
with the publisher over the magazine's provocative contents.

In the course of chronicling his regime as Harper's editor in chief, Mr. Morris
serves up some brightly drawn cameos. There's Norman Mailer, whose "reputation
as a veritable Coriolanus of the city pavements" belied a "gracious, witty,
well-mannered" demeanor in private; William Styron, "a sufferer" beneath "the
entertaining and easygoing Old Dominion surface"; and James Jones, "a profoundly
cultured and feeling man" who "could cry while reading Yeats."

Unfortunately, when Mr. Morris turns to the famous people he knew less
intimately, the results are perilously close to name-dropping. Drinking
Champagne with Orson Welles at the Plaza, taking the young Bill Clinton to
Elaine's, running into Senator Edward M. Kennedy at a party: these are the sorts
of anecdotes that might make another young person from the provinces want to
come to New York, but they don't have much to do with the story Mr. Morris sets
out to tell about "the city itself in the 60's" and they ultimately distract the
reader from the merits of this otherwise evocative book.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Willie Morris (Alen MacWeeney/Little, Brown)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Testifies in Inquiry of Commerce Dept.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 156 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 31


A man involved in accusations that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown took
$700,000 from the Vietnamese Government appeared today before a Federal grand
jury investigating the Commerce Department.

Federal prosecutors refused to discuss the reason for the testimony by the
witness, Nguyen Van Hao, or reveal the target of the investigation.

But officials close to the case, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said
that the panel was examining the Commerce Department.

Mr. Brown has denied taking money from Vietnam to lift trade sanctions. He
labeled the accusations "absolutely ridiculous" when they surfaced in U.S. News
& World Report and The Miami Herald in mid-August.

Mr. Hao was South Vietnam's vice premier for commerce when the government fell
to the communists in 1975, and was the only high official allowed to stay on in
Vietnam's new government. He now lives in Coral Springs, a suburb of Fort
Lauderdale.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Selection of New Chief Of NATO Forces Is Near

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31


With NATO facing an array of new missions, the Clinton Administration is poised
to select a successor to Gen. John Shalikashvili as the alliance's next military
commander.

Each of the four military services has nominated a four-star candidate to
succeed the departing NATO military boss, who on Oct. 1 will replace Gen. Colin
L. Powell as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mainly because the Army has fielded the bulk of American forces in Europe, the
job has gone to an Army general all but once since Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower was
appointed the first Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, in 1950. But some Pentagon
officials say that the uncertain security situation in Europe, now dominated by
the fighting in the Balkans, enhances the possibility that an Air Force general
could be chosen.

Chances are slim that a Navy or Marine Corps officer will be selected, these
officials added. Americans have always held the top NATO military position.

NATO Roles Are Changing

In NATO's civilian political-military partnership, the end of the cold war, and
with it the threat of an imminent Soviet attack, has somewhat diminished the
military's sway in the alliance's overall decision-making process, say
policymakers here and in Europe. But the Saceur, as the Supreme Allied
Commander, Europe, is called, is still one of the most important commands an
American officer can hold.

And while NATO is struggling to define new roles, it has no shortage of possible
missions. In addition to the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for example, the
next NATO military commander will confront difficult decisions on the use of
peacekeeping forces and expanding NATO's security umbrella, possibly to include
Eastern European countries.

"The next Saceur must have a sophisticated understanding of civilian-military
relations," said Andrew J. Goodpaster, a retired Army general who was the NATO
military commander from 1969 to 1974.

General Shalikashvili traveled widely in Western and Eastern Europe during his
year as Saceur, winning the trust and confidence of both political and military
leaders, NATO associates said.

Pentagon officials say that General Powell will submit the services'
recommendations, along with his own endorsement, to Defense Secretary Les Aspin
for his approval in the next several days. President Clinton must approve the
military's choice before sending the nominee's name to the Senate for
confirmation. NATO must also approve the choice, but that is seen as largely a
formality.

Candidates From Services

For each of the services, the civilian secretary and senior uniformed officer
approved the following candidates, Defense Department officials said.

The Army's choice is Gen. George A. Joulwan, 53 years old, the commander of the
United States Southern Command, which is based in Panama and is responsible for
American military activities in Latin America, except for Mexico and the
Caribbean.

A West Point graduate who served as a company commander in Vietnam, General
Joulwan has served four tours in Europe, including jobs as the Deputy Chief of
Staff for Army Operations and commander of V Corps in Germany.

The Air Force's candidate is Gen. Henry (Butch) Viccellio Jr., 53, the head of
the Air Force's Air Education and Training Command near San Antonio. The command
is responsible for recruiting and training Air Force personnel, as well as 130
jet pilots a year from other NATO countries at Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas.

General Viccellio, an Air Force Academy graduate who flew A-1's in Southeast
Asia, served most recently as director of the military's Joint Staff in
Washington, where he dealt with European affairs. His other most recent
assignments, however, have been in logistics jobs in the United States, which
could hurt his chances.

Only one Air Force general has been Saceur: Lauris Norstad, from 1956 to 1962.

Contender for Powell Job

The Navy's nominee, Adm. Charles R. Larson, the head of the United States
Pacific Command in Hawaii, had been a top contender to succeed General Powell.
As head of the Pacific Command, Admiral Larson, 56, is responsible for a region
that includes 45 countries from the West Coast of the United States to the east
coast of Africa.

Admiral Larson has also been mentioned as a possible successor to Adm. Frank B.
Kelso 2d as the next Chief of Naval Operations.

The Marine Corps selection, Gen. Joseph P. Hoar, was one of two finalists
President Clinton interviewed to succeed General Powell. General Hoar, 58, who
replaced Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf as the head of the United States Central
Command, is responsible for American military operations in Somalia and Iraq.

Mr. Aspin, of course, could reject all these candidates and select someone else.

Other Army candidates could include Gen. Dennis J. Reimer, the head of American
forces in the continental United States, and Lieut. Gen. Barry McCaffrey, a
Persian Gulf war commander who is now the director of strategic plans and policy
on the Joint Staff.

Two other Air Force candidates are Gen. Charles Horner, the head of the United
States Space Command, and Gen. George L. Butler, head of the United States
Strategic Command.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For Tourists or Purists, Curries of Many Colors

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1828 words


CURRY is the chameleon of the table. It not only comes in assorted colors --
yellow, red and green -- but also can transform an ordinary dish into something
aromatic and exotic. Shuffle the seasonings and an Indian dish can take on a
Thai, Burmese or Caribbean personality. It can even taste French. Now, as
Americans hanker for ever-spicier foods, curries of all sorts are becoming more
common here.

Since 1987, according to the American Spice Trade Association, sales of cumin
and turmeric, the two main components of curry, have risen strikingly, up 65
percent for cumin, which gives curry its aromatic, slightly bitter intensity,
and 40 percent for turmeric, the dried root that gives yellow curry its color.
Curry's heat comes from pepper and chilies, and their sales are also
skyrocketing.

The standard yellow curry powder, though, is just one of many seasonings now
available. Increasingly, stores are stocking curries from a number of countries,
in both "dry," or powdered form, and "wet," or paste. Among the new wet
seasonings available in stores now are Indian curries like Instant India and
Curry King. Two of the many brands of Thai varieties are Taste of Thai and Thai
Chef. Some of these products are made in the United States, while others are
imported, not only from Asia, but also from Canada, where two interesting brands
of Indian-style pastes are Himalayan Gourmet and Shahi.

Aside from being wet or dry, yellow (with turmeric), red (with red chilies) or
green (hotter, with green chilies), curries also fall into two other categories:
for tourists and for purists.

Tourist curries have been around for decades, with recipes calling for a
spoonful or two of curry powder to be added to a dressing for chicken salad, a
dip for crudites or the sauce for shrimp.

Purist curries for serious cooks hoping to capture authentic tastes are made
from scratch by toasting the seeds of the spices and then grinding and blending
them. No authentic Indian cookbook has recipes that call for curry powder.

Curry originated in India -- the term supposedly came from the kari leaf, a
seasoning sometimes used in curry -- and over the centuries, as Indian
merchants, traders and monks settled in different parts of the world, their
seasonings went with them, undergoing changes along the way. Curry is now common
throughout Southeast Asia, in parts of Africa and in the Caribbean. Curry
seasoning, when tamed, often shows up in English cooking, and it's used in
French and Creole dishes. Some of the best food in East Africa is curried.

Increasingly, many of the essential curry ingredients -- spices as well as fresh
chilies, lemon grass, fish sauce and unsweetened coconut milk -- are readily
available. Supermarkets are offering more choices, and in some neighborhoods,
Pan-Asian markets are opening. For instance, Brad Kelley and Lee Ping, the
owners of Kin Khao, a Thai restaurant on Spring Street in SoHo, plan to open a
food store called Kelley & Ping Asian Grocery and Noodle Shop later this month
at 127 Greene Street, near Houston.

Adriana's Bazaar, a shop at 2152 Broadway (at 75th Street) on Manhattan's Upper
West Side, sells seasonings and condiments from around the world. "When people
start using curry, they go first to the Indian, but lately consumers are
becoming more adventurous with Thai, Indonesian and Burmese," said Rochelle
Zabrakes, the owner. (On Sept. 14 from 7 to 9 P.M., she will be giving a spice
seminar emphasizing curries, with foods to sample. Admission is $10.)

Geeta Binde, an investment manager in Boston, started Instant India, a
flourishing line of curry pastes, as a sideline five years ago. "Indian is
making that transition from being strange food to something that's more
mainstream," said Ms. Binde, who is about to add a third flavor, Bombay Spice
and Sour, to her current offerings of Original and Punjab Hot and Spicy.

Curry pastes are made with fresh ingredients like onions, chilies, ginger, fish
sauce, and oil; the dry powders consist of ground spice blends. In India, the
dry mixes, often called masalas, are more common in the north. They tend to have
an earthy intensity, even though the dishes flavored with them may be mellowed
with cream or spinach. The curries of Myanmar closely resemble northern Indian
curries but are often used on noodles.

In Caribbean islands like Jamaica, Trinidad and Martinique, where Hindu workers
settled after the slaves were emancipated, dry spice mixtures similar to those
used in India season a host of dishes. A distinctively sour edge is often given
this food with the addition of tamarind pulp. Tamarind is also used to season
curries in Singapore. Wet curries are more typical in the south of India, and in
Southeast Asia, especially Thailand, Vietnam and Malaysia.

In the past, most of the Indian restaurants in the United States served food
more typical of the northern part of the country.

Maya Kaimal, the photo editor of Redbook magazine, is working on a cookbook
about southern Indian food with her father, Chandran Kaimal, a retired
atmospheric physicist. "Like Thai curries, ours often call for coconut milk and
fresh chilies, and they are used for vegetable and seafood dishes," said Ms.
Kaimal, whose family comes from Kerala, in southern India. Hindu and Buddhist
monks from southern India and Sri Lanka began settling in Thailand 1,000 years
ago and helped shape Thai cuisine.

The growing popularity of Thai cooking has opened a whole new gamut of curry
styles for American cooks who like the fresher wet curries, which often boast a
pungent touch of fermented fish or shrimp sauce and the intriguing fragrance of
lemon grass.

Serious cooks who are discovering southern Indian and Southeast Asian food are
starting to prepare their own wet pastes instead of opening jars, cans or
pouches. "The pastes we make in our restaurant are fresher and more complex than
the ones you buy," said Bruce Cost, the owner of Ginger Island, a Pan-Asian
restaurant in Berkeley, Calif.

But whether a cook wants to use pre-mixed powders and pastes, or assemble spices
from scratch, now is a perfect time to use curries. Vegetables like eggplants,
tomatoes and peppers, now at their peak, can stand up to forceful flavors. A
little curry will add spark to a salad dressing or cold soup, especially when
made with yogurt.

Curries are, after all, foods for hot climates; the spice prompts perspiration,
a kind of natural air-conditioning for the body. And the flavors whet appetites
flogged by sultry heat.

Bringing Pungency To Eggplant or Fish



Curried Eggplant
With Tomatoes
(Adapted from Maya Kaimal)
Total time: 40 minutes

 2 pounds eggplant, preferably slender Japanese variety
 3 tablespoons vegetable oil
 2 teaspoons ground coriander
 1 teaspoon ground cumin
 1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper
 1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric
 1 teaspoon salt, or to taste
 1/4 teaspoon black mustard seeds
 1/2 teaspoon fennel seeds
 2 cups chopped ripe tomatoes (about 1 1/2 pounds)
 2 teaspoons finely minced fresh ginger
 2 teaspoons finely minced garlic.

1. Preheat a grill. Slice eggplant 1/4-inch thick. Brush slices with half the
oil, and grill until lightly browned. (Alternatively, eggplant slices can be
sauteed, using 1/3 to 1/2 cup of oil.)

2. Combine coriander, cumin, cayenne pepper, turmeric and salt in a small dish;
set aside.

3. Heat remaining oil in a skillet. Add mustard seeds and fennel seeds, and when
they begin to pop, add tomatoes, ginger, garlic and the spice mixture. Cook over
medium-high heat, stirring constantly, until the mixture thickens and turns a
slight orange color.

4. Add eggplant, and mix to combine with other ingredients. Cover and cook over
medium-low heat about 10 minutes. Check seasoning, adding additional salt if
necessary. Serve hot or at room temperature.

Yield: 4 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 190 calories, 12 grams of fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 550 milligrams sodium without additional salt, 3 grams
protein, 20 grams carbohydrate.

Yellow Curry Fried Rice With Mussels
(Adapted from "Bruce Cost's Asian Ingredients"; Morrow, 1988)
Total time; 45 minutes

 3 1/2 cups cooked rice, preferably refrigerated overnight
 1teaspoon finely minced garlic
 2 tablespoons fresh lime juice
 7 tablespoons peanut oil
 24 mussels, scrubbed, debearded
 1/2 cup rice wine
 1/2 cup water
 2 teaspoons salt
 1/2 teaspoon black pepper
 1/4 cup homemade or purchased yellow curry paste (recipe follows)
 1 cup chopped Chinese chives (available in Chinatown).

1. Break up rice into individual grains.

2. Make a vinaigrette by combining garlic, lime juice and 5 tablespoons of the
peanut oil in a jar. Cover jar and shake well.

3. Put mussels, wine, water, 1 teaspoon salt and pepper into a saucepan. Cover;
steam over medium-high heat until mussels open, about 8 minutes. Transfer
mussels to a bowl with a slotted spoon, and toss with vinaigrette. Cover with a
towel. Reserve 3 tablespoons of the mussel broth.

4. In a wok or skillet, heat remaining peanut oil, and add curry paste. Stir
until fragrant. Add rice and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add remaining salt,
reserved broth and chives. Add mussels with a slotted spoon. Stir them into
rice; cook just until mixture is heated through. Serve at once.

Yield: 4 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 40 calories, 4 grams fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 60 milligrams sodium, less than 1 gram protein, 2 grams
carbohydrate.

Yellow Curry Paste
(Adapted from "Bruce Cost's Asian Ingredients"; Morrow, 1988)
Total time: 20 minutes

 30 small Thai "bird peppers" (sold in Asian markets)
 3 tablespoons coriander seeds
 1 1/2 teaspoons black peppercorns
 1 tablespoon cumin seeds
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh turmeric or 2 teaspoons ground
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh galangal or ginger
 1 bunch coriander
 12 cloves garlic, peeled
 1/2 cup chopped shallots
 1 large bulb from a stalk of lemon grass, chopped
 1/2 cup peanut oil
 2 teaspoons salt
 2 tablespoons prepared shrimp sauce (sold in Asian markets)
 2 tablespoons fresh lime juice.

1. In a dry skillet over medium heat toast peppers, coriander seeds, peppercorns
and cumin seeds until fragrant. Grind them in a mortar or spice grinder.

2. Put turmeric, galangal or ginger, the roots and 1 inch of the stems from the
fresh coriander, the garlic, shallots, lemon grass and 2 tablespoons of oil in a
food processor; grind to a paste. Add ground spices, salt, shrimp sauce and lime
juice; process until ingredients are blended. Transfer to a bowl, stir in
remaining oil and refrigerate until ready to use. It will keep for at least a
week.

Yield: 2 cups.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 510 calories, 30 grams fat, 30
milligrams cholesterol, 1,435 milligrams sodium, 15 grams protein, 40 grams
carbohydrate.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of jar of curry. (C.M. Hardt for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: September 5, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   2   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 2      2  56   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      3   4   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 4      4   5   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 5      6  21   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 6      5  25   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 7      7   8   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.

 8      8   3   THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.)
                The second volume of "The Tamuli," a fantasy saga.

 9      9  11   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 10    14   6   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
                (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a
                surgeon's daughter.

 11    10  14   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a
                multimillion-dollar fund.

 12    11   8   HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $23.)
                Saddam Hussein plots to steal and destroy the Declaration of
                Independence.

 13        13   THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A
                former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed
                by a vengeful woman.

 14    12  11   CRUEL & UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
                Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed
                for murder.

 15         1   VIRTUAL LIGHT, by William Gibson. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A
                scramble in the year 2005 for a pair of virtual-reality
                eyeglasses that disclose secrets.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      3  17   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      4   3   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 3      1  56   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 4      2   8   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 5      5  13   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 6      6  51   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.

 7     12   2   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 8      7  38   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 9      8  12   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.

 10     9   8   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House,
                $17.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.

 11    10  13   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                and radio commentator.

 12    13  29   HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.)
                Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship
                of sickness to thoughts and emotions.

 13    11  11   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

 14    15  14   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy
                marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 15         3   THE LAST BROTHER, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A
                biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   6   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      2  10   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 3      3  16   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4          1   FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins,
                $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 21, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear In Mind
(Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CRAZY IN ALABAMA, by Mark Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor
yet again, but in a novel that pounds every convention of the genre into
submission; not even the dead bodies interfere with the funniness.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children,
by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some
"home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others
believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.)
This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life
defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
FOXFIRE: Confessions of a Girl Gang, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William
Abrahams/Dutton, $21.) A dark and troubled epic of women who revenge themselves
on men, set in the slow-witted 1950's, before female bonding had been
discovered.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS, by Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful
novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp
commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE . . .: A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to
MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold
analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea
surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
SADE: A Biography, by Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A life of
the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness
in his honor, so to speak.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid,
highly literate personal account by the fortunate recipient of a miracle, a
distinguished historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.
SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories, by Maxine Chernoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Smart,
antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old
ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The author, a reporter for The Miami
Herald, delights to foul his front yard in hilarious fiction. What a horrible
place! One nice woman in the book only makes things worse, the poor thing.
THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's
Digest, by John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly
written history of a single bright idea and the preacher's kids who ran that
idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.
THE WRESTLER'S CRUEL STUDY, by Stephen Dobyns. (Norton, $22.95.) Probability has
no place in this entertaining post-modern novel, governed by the presence of a
wrestler's manager who talks and thinks like Nietzsche.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


THE ANT AND THE PEACOCK: Altruism and Sexual Selection From Darwin to Today
By Helena Cronin. Cambridge University, $19.95.
The author examines Darwinian philosophy in light of a problem that has always
dogged it: if natural selection prevails, how can we explain such
counterproductive traits as the altruism of ants and the gaudiness of peacocks?
Last year our reviewer, Mark Ridley, called this a "fine book," in which "the
subtlest and most original insights . . . concern differences between Darwin's
ideas and modern ideas."


YOUR BLUES AIN'T LIKE MINE
By Bebe Moore Campbell. Ballantine, $12.
Recalling the racially motivated murder of Emmett Till, a black teen-ager killed
for whistling at a white woman in Mississippi in 1955, this novel follows the
fortunes of two families -- the victim's and the killer's -- who are
inextricably linked by a similar act. "Much of the power of this novel results
from Ms. Campbell's subtle and seamless shifting of point of view," Clyde
Edgerton said here last year. Ballantine has also reissued Ms. Campbell's
memoir, SWEET SUMMER: Growing Up With & Without My Dad ($12), in which the
author, a child of divorce, describes the slow North Carolina seasons she spent
with her father, and how they contrasted with her otherwise urban upbringing.
"This material is potent, and some of the characters unforgettable," our
reviewer, Bharati Mukherjee, said in 1989.
FIELDS OF GLORY
By Jean Rouaud. Translated by Ralph Manheim.
Arcade, $9.95.
The impact of war -- the "Great War" -- on the life of a family in the lower
Loire region of France is the subject of this affecting fictional memoir, winner
of the Prix Goncourt in 1990. " 'Fields of Glory' deserves its success," Isabel
Colegate said here last year.
THE SHAH AND I: The Confidential Diary of Iran's
Royal Court, 1969-1977
By Asadollah Alam. Edited by Alinaghi Alikhani. Translated by Alinaghi Alikhani
and Nicholas Vincent.
St. Martin's, $16.95.
Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi was an irritable and insecure man, caught between the
demands of his country and those of the West. His character is illuminated here
by his Minister of Court, who served the Shah -- but not with unblinkered
devotion -- from 1966 to 1977. Last year our reviewer, Taghi Modarressi, said
these diaries "provide new information about the Shah, who appears in these
pages as embattled prey." In the same review, Dr. Modarressi praised as
"beautifully written" DAUGHTER OF PERSIA: A Woman's Journey From Her Father's
Harem Through the Islamic Revolution, by Sattareh Farman Farmaian with Dona
Munker (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95). The author had an unusual role model in her
father, who raised her traditionally yet permitted her the liberating advantage
of an education. After using it to found a school herself, she was ultimately
arrested by revolutionary fundamentalists. Also revealing a woman's life in Iran
is THE BLINDFOLD HORSE: Memories of a Persian Childhood, by Shusha Guppy
(Beacon, $12). Born late enough to escape the veil, the author enjoyed the rich
cultural life of her country before the revived burdens of fundamentalism. "She
has re-created that Persia for us in loving, sensuous detail," Abigail McCarthy
said here in 1989.
THE CARPATHIANS
By Janet Frame. Braziller, $11.95.
The inhabitants of a New Zealand town must come to grips with a frightening new
reality: the gravitational effects of a quasar have distorted all perception of
time and space, making a recently discovered galaxy seem paradoxically both near
and far. In 1989 our reviewer, Nancy Wartik, called this novel "a small
masterpiece of literary craftsmanship, the work of an original thinker with a
poet's ear." Braziller has also reissued two early collections by Janet Frame:
THE RESERVOIR: Stories and Sketches ($10.95) and SNOWMAN SNOWMAN: Fables and
Fantasies ($10.95). "These are personal statements by an enormously gifted
writer who sometimes lets her talent run away with her," Peter Dempsey,
reviewing both books, said here in 1963.
AFTER THE WAR WAS OVER: Hanoi and Saigon
By Neil Sheehan. Vintage, $9.
Serving as a postscript to the author's Pulitzer Prize-winning "Bright Shining
Lie," this book examines the present-day condition of Vietnam, which he finds
both impoverished and optimistic. Last year our reviewer, Kevin Cooney, said:
"As a Hanoi doctor said of the 19th-century microscope still used at his
hospital, 'After the War Was Over' helps us 'see a little better than with our
eyes.' " Also reflecting on the war is LONG TIME PASSING: Vietnam and the
Haunted Generation, by Myra MacPherson (Anchor/Doubleday, $15.95). Restored to
print and updated with a new introduction, this book includes more than 500
interviews with men and women who came of age during the conflict. "Miss
MacPherson shines a powerful light on the differences that divide this
generation," Donald Knox said here in 1984.
DECKED
By Carol Higgins Clark. Dove/Warner, $4.99.
The author has followed in the footsteps of her mother, Mary Higgins Clark, with
a first novel whose heroine is the daughter of -- who else? -- a famous mystery
writer. The fictional offspring solves the decade-old murder of her former
roommate. Last year one critic called the book "fast, glamorous, intricately
plotted."
DEATHBIRD STORIES
By Harlan Ellison. Collier, $9.
Fantasy at its most bizarre and unsettling is this author's trademark, and he
delivers it in spades in this collection. "There are times . . . when Ellison
raises excess and pretension to a form of art," Gerald Jonas said here in 1975.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Woodstock War

BYLINE: By DAVID BLUM

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2644 words


THREE American men in their late 40's have to get up every morning and consider
this fact as they shave: They created Woodstock. This, as it turns out, is a lot
to consider, and has probably resulted in a few nicks.

Now here's what those three men think of next, after they get done thinking
about those few rainy days in August 1969, when, in their minds, they changed
the world:

They think about how much fun it'll be to do it again next summer, on the 25th
anniversary.

"This time, we're going to do it right," declared Michael Lang, still the
curly-haired moptop head-shop owner who dreamed up Woodstock and became an
instant music mogul. With John Roberts and Joel Rosenman -- his partners in a
venture that gave a generation its defining moment -- Mr. Lang has begun the
planning of Woodstock 1994. This one is supposed to take place at Winston Farm
in Saugerties, near the town of Woodstock itself -- and some 60 miles northeast
of Max Yasgur's 38-acre farm in Bethel, the original site.

"Actually," Mr. Lang explained, "this is where the first one was going to be."

But as they did in the summer of 1969, Mr. Lang and his partners must realize
their dream against the backdrop of a war that, like Vietnam, is a muddled
battle with few heroes.

This time, it is the War of Woodstock.

It's a war in which one side's weapon is a word and the other's is a piece of
land.

On the other side of the battlefield is the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Hoping to raise millions of charity dollars, it also plans an anniversary
concert for that third weekend in August next year at Max Yasgur's farm.

Mr. Lang's version of a new, improved Woodstock will offer certain amenities
unavailable to the half a million people who made it the last time. At the
Woodstock of his dreams, a 1,000-person private security force will control a
crowd of 250,000, each of whom will have bought a $95 ticket through a lottery
six weeks ahead of time. The tickets will have a gummed, self-adhesive surface
so they can be worn at all times.

From eight different parking lots near the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, 350
shuttle buses will carry ticket-holders to the site. The producers will provide
2,500 toilets, one for every 100 people.

This time, the stage will be equipped to withstand a storm, and plenty of
ponchos will be on hand. And this Woodstock will last only two days. In 1994,
two days of peace, love and music is quite enough.

"The time is right," Mr. Lang said one recent afternoon in the kitchen of Happy
Brook, his sprawling Woodstock estate, as a maid cleared away the lunch plates.

Mr. Lang and his partners said their concert would be the only true Woodstock
anniversary concert because they own exclusive rights to the word. "There will
be one and only one Woodstock festival next year," Mr. Lang said flatly, "and it
will be ours."

Robert Gersch, the executive producer of the Multiple Sclerosis Society event,
conceded the name, but will be able to offer the original site. "If you own the
name Woodstock, you can have Woodstock II in the Astrodome on Easter Sunday,"
Mr. Gersch said when asked to compare the two events. "But I think, on the
anniversary of Woodstock, people will want to come back to where the first
festival really happened."

Mr. Gersch described his Woodstock as an event for 40,000 people, a more
palatable number, he said, to a community still reeling from last time. His
Woodstock will offer creature comforts like 1,000 "golden circle" seats for as
much as $5,000 apiece, with food service and luxury hotel accommodations.

Mr. Gersch has rather cannily sidestepped the copyright issue by calling his
concert "The Festival at Max Yasgur's Farm," banking on the lure of the land --
the fields of Sullivan County where Woodstock took place.

"Woodstock was more a state of mind than a piece of land," Mr. Lang retorted.
"Anyway, 99 out of 100 people think Woodstock was in Woodstock."

Lurking in the shadows of this battle is the legacy of the Woodstock festival
itself -- half a million people in the right place at the right time, making
history. Naked and muddy and stoned, they poured through gates that never were
onto a field too small to hold them. In front of them on a huge makeshift stage,
a succession of classic 60's groups like The Who, Ten Years After and The Band,
and legendary soloists like Baez, Hendrix and Joplin rocked the Catskills, and
beyond them a culture on the edge of apocalypse.

By that Monday morning, three babies were born, and two adults were dead, or so
legend has it. Within a few years, the Vietnam War ended. The apocalypse came
and went, or maybe it just slipped our minds.

Ever since, efforts to recapture the spirit of that historic moment have failed
-- except perhaps in the town of Woodstock, which has cast itself as a kind of
60's theme park for tourists. It's easier to buy crystals in Woodstock than a
roast-beef sandwich; real-life hippies congregate in the town square like it's a
be-in, and the town's official colors would appear to be tie-dye.

Tourists flock to Woodstock every Aug. 15 to 17 for the anniversary; many of
them have fun pretending to be wasted, checking out local bands or muttering to
themselves about "getting back to the garden."

Of course, Woodstock became a cliche almost before it was over. The other night,
Christian Slater was telling Jay Leno that he expected the MTV Music Awards he
would be the host of to be, you know, kinda, sorta like Woodstock. ABC News once
went searching for the babies born at Woodstock, to no avail. And The Woodstock
Times -- the local weekly -- has covered anniversary news regularly on the front
page. To locals, these rituals have become a summer staple -- a kind of
Fourth-of-July-style event, with coverage presented as the brighter side of the
news.

To some, the hoopla has never really stopped. On the 20th anniversary in 1989,
Mr. Lang and his partners tried to mount a concert at the Berlin Wall, but
Warner Brothers -- which owned a large chunk of rights after making the
Oscar-winning 1970 movie and two albums from the original concert -- blocked it.
At the time, Mr. Lang expressed this attitude about anniversary concerts to a
Rolling Stone reporter:

"Really, we weren't interested in doing a big show in upstate New York. I lived
through one of those already. It was enough."

Mr. Lang has since changed his mind. As he proudly displayed a plastic binder
with a 15-page written proposal for WOODSTOCK 1994, he said with excitement and
a sweet 60's smile, "This time, we've got everything worked out in advance."

For Woodstock Ventures -- the company formed by Mr. Lang and his partners in
early 1969 to produce the first festival -- this concert marks a chance to
recoup the financial losses of Woodstock. Mr. Lang and the record promoter Artie
Kornfeld sold their shares in the company to Mr. Rosenman and Mr. Roberts for
some $30,000 each right after the festival -- after the bickering among the
partners led Mr. Lang to want out, and before Warner Brothers wrote a check for
the rights to distribute the movie and albums.

Even so, Mr. Rosenman and Mr. Roberts claim that they didn't turn a profit on
their Woodstock investment for another decade, and that it didn't amount to
much. (The concert ended up being free, which didn't help.)

This time Mr. Lang, even without his original share, is back on board as a
partner; and Mr. Rosenman and Mr. Roberts expect Warner Brothers to give the
go-ahead this time -- an approval that is essential for this plan to go forward,
though you wouldn't know it from their all-systems-go attitude, or from the
proposal presented to the Saugerties Town Board. To present a united, happy
front, these three men have put signs of acrimony temporarily aside. After all,
they stand to make money this time -- an excellent reason to be friends, at
least through next August.

"This one is meant to be a profitable venture," Mr. Roberts said recently.
"Everyone does things to make money. We are no different."

For Mr. Gersch, who is executive director of the New York State chapter of the
Multiple Sclerosis Society, it is a simple matter of raising money for charity.
"All the profits will go straight to the Multiple Sclerosis Society," he said.

That prompted a scoff from Mr. Lang. "Half the money goes to charity," he said,
"and half goes to Gersch."

Mr. Gersch, though, said he is getting only his regular salary from the society.
"I'm not a music promoter," he said, adding that none was hired so that more
money would go to the charity. He insisted that the charity will be the
overwhelming beneficiary of the event.

Mr. Rosenman -- the least enthusiastic of the three Woodstock partners -- was
the quickest to note that charities will reap benefits of their festival through
something called the Woodstock Festival Foundation, specifics to be announced.
"The only thing different about the Gersch effort is that it's labeled a charity
event," Mr. Rosenman said.

Both sides base their calculations on sellouts. For Woodstock Ventures, that
means $24 million in revenue, not counting a planned pay-per-view broadcast,
movie and album rights. Mr. Gersch, whose ticket prices will range from $150 to
$5,000, gave no estimates, but assumed that ticket demand would be enormous.

All of which is fascinating to observe, since neither group has announced a
lineup of performers. In fact, the only definitive statement from either side is
that the other concert won't happen.

"From what I hear," Mr. Gersch said, "their effort is far from a done deal."

Mr. Rosenman countered, "If I had to guess, I'd say the Gersch concert will
never actually happen."

From Michael Lang came the assertion that unlike the Gersch project, the three
partners' concert isn't aimed at the original Woodstock audience, or even
nostalgia buffs. They're looking for the 18-to-25-year-old market -- the sort of
audiences who have flocked to this summer's Lollapalooza tour.

"We're not doing an oldies show," Mr. Lang said. "We're trying to do a new
event. Gersch is going to have jazz, country, a couple of other events. We'll
have hundreds of acres, two stages, world music, experimental stuff, plus big
bands like U2, Guns 'n' Roses and Paul Simon."

When pressed, Mr. Lang conceded that those artists hadn't yet been booked. "That
can't happen till we have the official go-ahead from Saugerties," an approval
that may come as soon as Wednesday, and is necessary for the plans to go
forward.

Saugerties officials sound positive so far about the Woodstock Ventures
proposal, which calls for $1 of each $95 ticket to be given to the town. Another
cut of the revenue will go to the Schaller family, which owns the 740-acre
Winston Farm, once thought of primarily as a possible landfill site. And for the
entire area, the project promises to bring badly needed jobs and tourism.

The Saugerties Town Supervisor, George Terpening, said: "I like Michael Lang. He
seems to know what he's doing."

Mr. Lang's group has been throwing around some big names freely in recent weeks,
and community approval may rest on the belief that big-name acts will appear. It
seemed legitimate to wonder whether those acts might really appear at a concert
celebrating Woodstock's 25th anniversary.

"We haven't been asked," said Dan Klores, Mr. Simon's spokesman. "It wouldn't be
right to use Paul's name. It would be wrong to use his name in connection with
any concert where he hasn't been asked.

"Anyway, at that time next year I'm not sure he'd have the time. He'll be at
work on another project, a Broadway musical."

U2 was even more emphatic. "They won't be performing at all next summer," said
the group's press representative, Brian O'Neal. "And in any case, they don't do
one-shot things and then say goodbye."

Even if it's Woodstock?

"Even if it's Woodstock."

Mr. Gersch already has approval from Bethel and Sullivan County for his concert;
they will be, like Saugerties, financial partners in the venture. Their go-ahead
has already enabled him to book bands that are, he claimed, "an anthology of
great modern American music," though he declined to name any of the performers.
Mr. Gersch did say he would aim his acts squarely at the baby-boomer crowd; if
it seems less likely that people in their 40's want to spend the weekend in a
tent, at least he isn't counting on a quarter-million of them showing up.

His proposal calls for a maximum of 40,000 tickets sold, and free admission for
the citizens of Bethel. Mr. Gersch promises at least a few of the original
groups that performed at Woodstock -- something that Lang and his partners have
diplomatically avoided in their public comments so far.

Standing ready to play at any and all Woodstock reunions is John Sebastian,
formerly of the Lovin' Spoonful, whose solo appearance at the 1969 Woodstock
still stands as a career high point.

"I see Mike Lang at restaurants," said Mr. Sebastian, a longtime Woodstock
resident, "and he's always smiling at me and saying, 'We should talk.' I figure
when the time comes, I'll get asked."

And will he say yes?

"Sure," Mr. Sebastian said. "I'm a yuppie's worst nightmare: an aging hippie."

Mr. Sebastian has even been back to the Yasgur farm a few times, usually with
Japanese television crews. From Woodstock, Mr. Sebastian has to cross a
tree-filled, rustic stretch of Ulster County and pass a slate-blue reservoir or
two to reach the Yasgur farm.

Max Yasgur is dead, and Michael Lang says he could have bought the land for
$70,000 in the mid-70's; a business blunder, he now concedes. June Gelish, a
Brooklyn resident, bought the nonworking farm instead, and was kind enough to
put a cast-iron monument (designed by Wayne Saward) on the site -- though Mr.
Sebastian's name is misspelled. All the performers at Woodstock got their names
on the plaque, leaving future generations to puzzle over the meaning of the
words Sha Na Na.

On the 24th anniversary last month, people came to place wreaths and flowers and
joints in the vicinity of the monument, or to pose for pictures, or just to hang
out. Even a self-appointed security guard named Marshall Mellow showed up. Like
all the anniversaries before, hundreds of determined fans made the trip to the
gentle fields of Sullivan County in search of an oddly meaningful piece of
farmland.

As visitors looked down on the spot where a stage once stood, they saw what
their mind allowed them to see -- most often a memory of a time long past, a
time before jobs and families and responsibilities. For some, it was a time
further back than their memories could reach.

"Last night I walked the field, just trying to feel stuff," said Chris Maget, a
27-year-old in cutoff shorts and black sneakers, who drives up from New Jersey
every year to spend his vacation on the Yasgur farm.

"There's a great vibe off that spot," he said in a surprisingly believable way.
"Last year, I went out in the woods and found stuff from the festival, things
people left, like old mess kits. I think I even found the bottom of somebody's
sneaker."

Chris Maget will not be at any of the Woodstock festivals next year. He will
definitely not be going to Saugerties. He will come here to the farm. If there
is a concert taking place, he said, he will leave and hang out nearby. He was
only 3 when Woodstock happened; he does not come to Max Yasgur's farm in search
of something he missed. He has found what he is looking for, in this empty
field.

"From now on, this is a free concert. What it means is that the people who are
running this thing, who put up the money for it, are going to be taking a bit of
a bath . . . But what it means is that these people have it in their heads that
your welfare is a hell of a lot more important than making a buck."

-- Stage announcer

Woodstock Music and Arts Festival

Aug. 15, 1969

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rivals planning 25th-anniversary Woodstock concerts are in a
war in which one side's weapon is a word and the other's is a piece of land.
Above, pilgrims at the original site, Max Yasgur's farm in Bethel, N.Y. (Suzanne
DeChillo/The New York Times)(pg. 1); Robert Gersch, above, has leased the
original site for a 25th-anniversary concert, while Michael Lang, above right,
plans one closer to Woodstock itself. Marshall Mellow, right, is the
self-appointed security force for the original site, for which Wayne Saward,
below right, designed and built a monument. (Photographs by Suzanne DeChillo/The
New York Times)(pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For an Envoy, A Fond Adios From Mexico

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Sept. 3


Before John D. Negroponte ever arrived in Mexico City as the United States
Ambassador, he had made a good many enemies.

In the early 1980's, as Ambassador to Honduras, where he helped to establish a
rear guard for the Reagan Administration's guerrilla war against the Sandinista
Government of Nicaragua, he was often called "The Proconsul," after the
imperious governor of a pliant colony.

When he was sent to Mexico in 1989, months after an insurgent leftist movement
nearly defeated the governing party at the polls for the first time in 60 years,
Mexican intellectuals feared the worst, whatever they took that to be.

But as Mr. Negroponte, a 54-year-old career diplomat, prepared for his departure
from Mexico today, it was with a whirl of farewell parties, warm praise from the
Government and mumblings of respect even from some of those who railed at his
arrival.

"He conducted the smoothest, most discreet covert operation in the history of
U.S.-Mexican relations," said Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, a political analyst and
commentator who joined in the attack on Mr. Negroponte four years ago.

Taking the Long View

"With a long-term, historical perspective, we will probably have a lot of nasty
things to say about what Mr. Negroponte did here," he predicted, "but we don't
know what those things are yet. In that sense, he was probably a superb
Ambassador of the United States."

Other political observers, including Mexican and American officials, see a
brighter future for the relationship between the two countries and less menace
in Mr. Negroponte's brief. But their argument is not so different.

As Mexico has moved closer to the United States under President Carlos Salinas
de Gortari, setting aside a history of bitterness and mistrust and pressing for
approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, they say Mr. Negroponte has
played an important role in shepherding the country forward -- in no small part
by not seeming to. In a country deeply sensitive to gringo meddling, he has
given quiet diplomacy a good name.

The evolution of Mr. Negoponte's image in Mexico would seem to reflect a deep
change in its relationship with the United States, with the suppression of
interventionist instincts on one side and nationalist instincts on the other.

Then again, the man appointed as Mr. Negroponte's successor immediately
detonated a new burst of outrage.

On the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina, wanted to know whether the ambassador-designate, James R. Jones,
intended to press Mexico on issues like the democratization of its political
system, drug control and human rights.

In his written answer to Senator Helms's long written question, Mr. Jones -- a
former Oklahoma congressman, Johnson White House aide and chairman of the
American Stock Exchange -- said simply, "Yes."

The subsequent editorials in leftist newspapers calling on the Salinas
administration to reject Mr. Jones were perhaps to be expected. More striking
was the evident anger of senior Mexican officials who, like Mr. Negroponte, have
taken some pride in "compartmentalizing" thorny differences in the relationship.


Too Discreet, Critics Say

By contrast, Mr. Negroponte has drawn occasional criticism of the sort he began
to earn after first gaining the attention of men like Henry Cabot Lodge and
Henry A. Kissinger as a strapping Vietnamese-speaking aide in his 20's during
the Vietnam War. In general, his problem has been one of vigorous, effective
carrying out of policies that have not enjoyed wide support.

In Mexico, he has been accused particularly of being too discreet. "He got too
close to the Government," said a Congressional specialist on Latin American
affairs.

In an interview some weeks before his departure, Mr. Negroponte protested that
he had made a particular effort to insure better treatment of Americans by the
Mexican criminal justice system.

He cited problems with narcotics control and other law-enforcement issues as
"clearly still the most sensitive aspect of the relationship," but argued that
Mexican politics were evolving steadily toward greater democracy. He was asked
whether his embassy had pushed that evolution along.

"If we did," he said, "I wouldn't put it on the record."

NAME: John D. Negroponte

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John D. Negroponte (Gerardo Magallon for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Russians Give U.S. More P.O.W. Documents

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 4


Documents that could shed light on a 1973 report found in Soviet archives about
American prisoners of war held by North Vietnam have been handed over to
American researchers during a meeting of the joint committee on P.O.W.'s, an
American co-chairman of the committee said this week.

Both Malcolm S. Toon, who heads the American side of the joint committee, and
his Russian counterpart, Gen. Dmitri A. Volkogonov, said on Thursday that they
were certain of the authenticity of the disputed 1973 document, which was a
Russian translation of a report to the ruling Politburo in Hanoi contending that
North Vietnam was holding 1,205 American prisoners of war in September 1973.

The report, which was sent to the Soviet Politburo through military intelligence
channels and found in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party last spring,
has been denounced as a fake by the Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Toon said United States intelligence analysts had concluded that the
contents of the report were "somewhat inaccurate." Experts have noted that the
North Vietnamese general who delivered the report to the Hanoi Politburo was not
a Deputy Chief of Staff at that time, as the Soviet translation maintained, and
that it was known that American prisoners were not separated in North Vietnam
according to their political beliefs.

Mr. Toon said, however, that the investigation into the origins of the report
was continuing. "We continue to have an open mind on this," he said. "The case
is not closed by any means." He said his team had not yet had time to examine
the information in the new documents handed over at the P.O.W. committee's
meetings this week.

A Russian Security Ministry official, present at a news conference today
announcing the delivery of the new documents, said that Americans had had
interviews with several top K.G.B. officers who served in Hanoi in the Vietnam
War.

Russian researchers have not yet been able to find a copy of the original
Vietnamese report in the Soviet archives, nor have they been able to turn up any
follow-up documents produced by Soviet foreign policy makers as they considered
the implications of the intelligence report. At the time of the report and its
distribution to the Soviet Politburo, North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris were
stating that Hanoi was holding 368 American prisoners of war.

Although new information continues to be found in the archives, Mr. Toon said
there was still some resistance from the intelligence community both in Russia
and in the United States to open their files and help the joint P.O.W. committee
establish the fate of American and Soviet servicemen killed or lost in the cold
war.

According to General Volkogonov, the Ministry of Security, the former Soviet
K.G.B., has opened its files to produce "an almost complete list," complete with
dates and sites, of 1,300 American aircraft shot down by Soviet air forces and
air defense over Korea.

But Mr. Toon complained about a lack of candor about further Soviet involvement
with American prisoners from the Korean war, some of whom may have been held in
prison camps in the Soviet Union. "I can only tell you that we have had the
feeling that there must be some information somewhere in Russia about primarily
Soviet involvement with our Korean P.O.W.'s," he said. "And our feeling has been
that somebody has not been very forthcoming about this."

But General Volkogonov said that Russian researchers "have not found clear
proof, except hypotheses and suppositions, about the handover of American
P.O.W.'s to the Soviet Union" in the Korean war.

For their part, the Americans handed over to the Russians information about 11
crashes of Soviet planes outside the territory of the Soviet Union, including
some close to the American borders.

These crashes have been closely guarded secrets here, General Volkogonov said.
"Our press has never reported these cases," he said. "And the relatives do not
know anything about these people. There was just a brief notification, 'died in
the line of duty.' "

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Rebels Seek Refuge in U.S. And Find Themselves in Crossfire

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1616 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Sept. 2


Taha A. deserted the Iraqi Army during the invasion of Kuwait and was sentenced
to death for helping Kuwaiti families go into hiding, according to the execution
warrant he keeps as a macabre memento. He escaped into Saudi Arabia, where he
spent two and a half years in what he calls the "desert hell" of a refugee camp.

So when the 30-year-old ex-soldier stepped off an airplane here this summer and
started work as a check-out clerk at a 7-Eleven convenience store, things seemed
to be looking up. At least until one recent day, when he noticed two customers
gesturing toward him and heard one of them grumbling about the "stinking enemy."


Furor Over Benefits

As he resettles here at the American Government's expense and under terms of a
1975 refugee-protection law, Taha is just one of hundreds of former Iraqi
soldiers who find themselves in the crossfire of an increasingly bitter debate
over whether they should have been allowed in this country at all. Taha A. and
the other Iraqis interviewed asked that they not be fully identified because
they fear that Iraqi agents may come after them in their new homes and they are
worried about the safety of their family still in Iraq.

Federal officials insist that the Iraqis here are exactly the kind of people the
law was intended to protect. The Immigration and Naturalization Service says all
were extensively screened and "determined to have a well-founded fear of
persecution" in Iraq, typically because they or their relatives were part of the
insurgency that rose up against President Saddam Hussein. Several of the Iraqis
said they had heeded handbills dropped from the sky by American planes, urging
them to fight against the forces of the Iraqi dictator and promising allied
support in the effort that never materialized.

Nonetheless, as the Iraqi rebels have begun arriving in this country in recent
weeks, the spectacle of taxpayers' money being spent on people who can at least
technically be described as former soldiers of an enemy army has provoked a
thunderclap of opposition, perhaps especially so because the benefits they
receive -- free medical care, housing and language assistance, job placement --
are more generous than the help available to many American veterans.

The Iraqi resettlement program was approved by the Bush Administration, which
seems to have bequeathed the Clinton Administration a major political headache.
Eighty-five Congressmen have signed a letter to President Clinton demanding an
immediate halt to what they call the "potentially dangerous and unfair policy"
of resettling former Iraqi soldiers. The August letter, to which Mr. Clinton has
not responded, suggests that the money be rechanneled to veterans' programs
instead.

The Iraqi refugees have also found themselves to be fodder for call-in radio
programs across the country, including one in San Francisco, where a caller
suggested the other day that the United States was now importing more World
Trade Center bombers at its own expense. Here in Dallas, David Gold, a host of a
popular call-in program on KLIF, said the policy appeared to be "universally
disdained" by his callers. "Nobody's ever called in to defend it," he said.

Some advocates for the Iraqi refugees said the anger against them has been
fanned by a general national backlash against immigration.

'Not an Easy Time'

"It's not an easy time to be an immigrant in this country, and it's not an easy
time to be an Iraqi," said Elizabeth Underhill, executive director of the Dallas
branch of the International Rescue Committee. The nonprofit group has worked
under a State Department contract to resettle about 50 Iraqis, about a third of
whom were former soldiers, in the Dallas area this summer.

"But these refugees were victims over there, and now they've become victims
here," she continued. "People are saying, 'Oh, because they're from Iraq, they
must be the enemy.' Nothing could be further from the truth. They would not be
here if they were the enemy."

And those at the center of the debate, including Taha A., seem a bit bewildered
by it all. "I have heard that some American people are saying we have blood on
our hands," he said in an interview the other night in his spartan apartment.
The only wall adornment is a poster with a bull's-eye around Saddam Hussein, at
which he eagerly throws darts to demonstrate his hatred of the man.

"This is crazy," he said. "This is a nightmare for me. I gave blood in the
refugee camps. I signed up four times when the allies said they needed blood."

Shows His Death Warrant

Among various documents Taha shared with a reporter to authenticate his story
was the death warrant, whose Arabic text was confirmed by the program director
with Catholic Charities, the agency helping him to resettle.

Several other Iraqis interviewed here, civilians and former soldiers alike, had
similar stories and offered similar pleas for compassion. "Why would I come
here?" said one 25-year-old former soldier who used his family name of Al-Faily
and said he took part in the unsuccessful coup attempt against Saddam Hussein.

"Why would I prefer to be a refugee, rather than a citizen in my own country?"
the man asked. "I swear to you, I feel the same way Americans do. Saddam Hussein
is the enemy."

Representative Donald Manzullo, the Illinois Republican who wrote the letter to
President Clinton and persuaded 84 of his colleagues in Congress to sign it,
conceded that he had not actually spoken with any of the refugees himself. But
he said that was beside the point, since many of their stories would be
impossible to verify anyway.

"We have no idea, really, which of these guys had guns, which of them might have
fired at Americans," he said in a telephone interview. "We have no idea what
they really think, unless maybe we give them a lie detector test and we say,
'O.K., do you like Saddam Hussein or do you not like Saddam Hussein?' There's
really no way to check."

State Department Assailed

And Mr. Manzullo said it was disingenuous of the State Department to suggest
that the Iraqis belonged here because of the refugee law, which has enabled
people from Vietnam, Cambodia, Somalia, Ethiopia and dozens of other countries
to resettle here in recent years.

"Seventeen million people around the world qualify under the law," he said. "Are
we supposed to take them all?"

Of the nearly 110,000 Iraqi soldiers who were captured or surrendered in the
aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, all but 13,000 were repatriated to Iraq after
Saddam Hussein issued a general amnesty.

But those 13,000, as well as about 25,000 Iraqi civilians, remained in cramped,
caged Saudi refugee camps where malnutrition, illness and harsh treatment were
routine. The resettlements here are part of a complex, four-nation plan, in
which Sweden, Denmark and Norway are also taking part, to slowly clear out the
camps. Iran has also made a separate agreement with Saudi Arabia to take in some
of the civilians from areas bordering Iran.

United Nations Had Role

Representative Manzullo and others have suggested that the Iraqis be repatriated
to other Middle Eastern countries that were allied with the United States in the
gulf war. But after those countries balked, the United Nations brokered the
plan, which President George Bush approved, to send them elsewhere.

Whether the Iraqi refugees ever served in the military, and whatever their
political attitudes may be, there is a concerted effort to stop spending
American money on them, and no group has been more outspoken in the effort than
the Veterans of Foreign Wars, which adopted a resolution condemning the policy
at its 94th national convention here in late August.

"I find it incomprehensible that money cannot be found to take care of those who
defended this nation with their lives, especially since approximately $70
million to $100 million is suddenly available to those who once faced our sons
and daughters on the field of battle," said a telegram the group sent to the
President under the name of its commander in chief, John M. Carney.

The deputy director of the Department of Health and Human Services' Office of
Refugee Resettlement, David B. Smith, disputed both Mr. Carney's suggestion that
any of the refugees had ever engaged Americans in combat during the gulf war and
his estimate of resettlement costs. He said the $70 million figure was based on
the larger cost of American plans to relocate about 10,000 Iraqi refugees here,
including thousands of Kurds who were attacked by the Iraqi army and who have
already been brought here.

Washington estimates that 4,600 Iraqis will have resettled in the United States
in the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30. Of those, some 2,100 are from Saudi
camps. About 650 of the 4,600 are ex-soldiers or others who rebelled against
Saddam Hussein.

Still, the essential image of money spent on Iraqis that could be spent on
American veterans clearly amounts to a potent political issue.

"Ask not what your country can do for you, ask what it can do for your enemies,"
said Richard Fitzpatrick, executive director of the National Coalition for
Homeless Veterans. "This is the message."

For the Iraqis who are already here, it is has largely become a question of
waiting to see just how the public mood blows, and whether relatives and friends
eager to come here will be allowed to.

"Our stories are true," insisted one former soldier named Jameel, who arrived
here last month and plans to start work in a factory that makes jewelry boxes.
"If we wanted Saddam Hussein, we would have stayed with Saddam Hussein. We were
desperate to escape from Saddam Hussein."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Taha A., another former Iraqi soldier, showing his death
warrant. On the wall is a poster of Saddam Hussein at which he throws darts.;
"Why would I prefer to be a refugee, rather than a citizen in my own country?"
asked a former Iraqi soldier who used his family name of Al-Faily. "I swear to
you, I feel the same way Americans do. Saddam Hussein is the enemy." He sat
reading in his apartment in Dallas. (Photographs by Mark Graham for The New York
Times) (pg. D10)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
For a Bruising Battle, Clinton Enlists a Daley

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1441 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 6


If the Clinton Administration ever needed to call on the deep magic of the
Democratic Party, it needs to now, as it teeters on the brink of an internecine
struggle over the North American Free Trade Agreement.

"New Democrats" are all well and good when it comes to policy making, but when
it comes to negotiating the minefields of internal Democratic politics -- the
angry Lane Kirklands who say the treaty will cost American jobs, the clamoring
environmentalists, the jittery House members -- the accumulated knowledge of the
"old Democrats" has its place. And so the Administration has brought in a Daley
from Chicago and handed him one of the messiest chores of this or any political
season.

William M. Daley, the youngest son of a former Mayor of Chicago and the brother
of the current one, as well as his confidant and strategist, was named last
month as Special Counselor to the President on the North American Free Trade
Agreement. Along with Bill Frenzel, a former Republican Congressman who sat on
the Ways and Means Committee, Mr. Daley is coordinating the effort to get the
trade agreement through a balky Congress.

"The President asked," Mr. Daley said with a shrug over a breakfast interview,
when asked the inevitable question: why? "And I believe that when the President
asks you to help him on something, if you can, you should respond."

Seeking Some Calm

Against a wave of dire warnings from the pundits, Bill Daley is trying to calm
people. "When I saw Broder's piece comparing this to the Vietnam War, I thought,
'I didn't know it was this serious,' " Mr. Daley says with a laugh, referring to
the columnist David Broder of The Washington Post. Mr. Daley is saying that
Democrats can disagree without destroying one another. He is doing what he was
hired to do, be a pol.

"I think people will watch their rhetoric," Mr. Daley says. "I'm talking about
the political people, now.  I'm not talking about the people on the outside."

He clearly watches his own rhetoric. Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan,
the House majority whip who is a staunch opponent of the trade agreement, "is
very effective, very good," Mr. Daley says. "But we have a number of people on
the pro-Nafta side who are strong members of the House and know how to count,"
he adds.

As for his friends in organized labor, Mr. Daley says he told them, "I wouldn't
be doing this if I really didn't believe that this President would never be
pushing an agreement that would cost jobs in America."

Some Measured Replies

Rex Hardesty, a spokesman for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., replies just as carefully:
"Bill Daley is our friend. He'll be our friend when it's over. But right now
we'll oppose him with everything we have, because he is wrong on Nafta."

Mr. Daley, who is 45, has worked as a banker and a lawyer-lobbyist, and is on
leave from the Chicago-based law firm of Mayer, Brown & Platt. He is known in
Democratic circles as a political operative and a plugged-in guy, the
behind-the-scenes Daley.

He is a veteran of several Presidential campaigns, including those of Walter F.
Mondale in 1984, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. in 1987 and Michael S. Dukakis in
1988. He was the Illinois chairman of the Clinton campaign last year -- Mr.
Clinton carried the state -- and played a major role in the mayoral campaigns of
his brother, Richard M. Daley.

He grew up over the store, so to speak, as one of seven children of the man who
ran Chicago for 21 years and presided over the Cook County Democratic
organization in its glory days. (As Mayor Richard J. Daley once said:
"Organization, not machine. Get that. Organization, not machine.") Bill Daley
was a child when his father was kibbitzing with the Kennedys and was still a
youth when the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago became a symbol of
a party torn apart over Vietnam.

'The Dominant Item'

"Politics and government were my father's whole life," Bill Daley says.
"Obviously it was the dominant conversation and the dominant item in our lives
as we grew up. I was only 7 years old when he was first elected, so the vast
majority of our lives revolved around that."

It left its mark. A friend, the political consultant David Axelrod, says, "He's
a guy who likes to be in the mix, likes to be in the fray."

He was very much in the mix last winter, when newspapers suggested that he was
all but certain to be announced as the President's nominee for Secretary of
Transportation but then was left dangling, much to the dismay of the Daley
crowd. The job ultimately went to Federico F. Pena.

Mr. Daley is diplomatic about it today, but the way he was treated then was
widely seen as a source of friction between his brother, the Mayor, and the
Administration.

A Battle or a Break?

"It just kind of got out of hand there at the end with everybody being sure it
was me, and I was about the only one around who was thinking it wasn't," Bill
Daley says now. "But when you've been around for a long time, these things
happen. If that was the first campaign you were ever involved in, the first time
dealing with government or politicians, then I guess you'd be awfully depressed
and shocked and hurt. But there are worse things that happen in life."

His selection to run the campaign for the trade agreement was widely seen as a
gesture of sensitivity by the Administration to traditional Democrats:
organization-minded, labor-friendly Democrats in the industrial Midwest. And
clearly, it was a way of bringing a Daley back into the fold. (Illinois, after
all, has 22 electoral votes.) For Bill Daley, it is another chance to be in the
fray in a very high-profile role. And, some Democrats say, since the struggle
for the trade agreement is widely considered to be uphill, it is something of a
no-lose proposition for his reputation.

For all of that, he clearly runs some risk. When Lane Kirkland, the president of
the A.F.L.-C.I.O., was asked about Mr. Daley's selection at a briefing with
reporters last week, the labor leader replied: "I don't think that it makes much
difference. I am sure that it may enhance Bill Daley's capacity to attract
clients in the future, as has been the case with others who have served in some
capacity with the Office of Special Trade Representative."

Mr. Daley, who plans to return to his law practice after the campaign for the
trade agreement, responded that he would be subject to the relevant Federal laws
for former Government officials and added, "I wasn't doing trade, and I don't
plan to do any trade afterward."

Mr. Daley said the campaign would be coordinated by about 15 or 20 people,
handling the press, scheduling and Congressional relations. It will be what the
Administration likes to call a "war room" operation, although Mr. Daley winces
at the term. "Oh, God, the war room, if I hear that again," he said. "Grown men
talking about a war room."

Trouble in the House

But the effort will be reminiscent of a campaign, he said, "the bottom line:
there's going to be a vote, and we've got to get X number of votes."

The House is considered the primary trouble spot. Mr. Daley estimates that there
are about "150 to 170 solid pro-Nafta votes" in the House, meaning the
Administration needs 50 to 70 more, "which three and a half months out, if we
assume it's voted on in December, is not insurmountable."

Mr. Daley argues that the way to win is "making the case as to the actual facts,
what the truth is, as opposed to all these lies and misstatements that are out
there." Asked about Ross Perot, who is making one of the most visible cases
against the trade agreement, Mr. Daley replies simply, "I think he's an awfully
good politician."

And where does his brother, the Mayor, stand? "I don't know, honest to God, I
don't," Mr. Daley said in an interview last week. "He's more involved right now
with the potential school strike."

A spokeswoman for the Mayor, when asked about the trade issue last week, said he
was neutral about it the last time the question was raised.  Nothing comes easy
for Democrats on Nafta.

WILLIAM MICHAEL DALEY

Born: Aug. 9, 1948
Hometown: Chicago, Ill.
Education: St. Ignatius High School; B.S., Political Science, Loyola University;
J.D., John Marshall Law School.
Career Highlights: 1975-85, lawyer, Daley & George; 1985-90, partner, Mayer,
Brown & Platt; 1990-93, president and chief executive officer, Amalgamated Bank
of Chicago; 1992, Illinois chairman, Clinton-Gore Presidential Campaign;
currently on leave from Mayer, Brown & Platt.
Family: Married, Loretta Aukstik; two daughters and one son.
Hobbies: Golf, water skiing, the White Sox.

NAME: William M. Daley

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William M. Daley, a son of a former Mayor of Chicago and brother
of the current one, was named last month as Special Counselor to the President
on the North American Free Trade Agreement. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 929 words



International A3-15

SHARING POWER IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa has agreed to share broad powers with a multiparty transition
committee before its first universal election, placing the police, the army, the
budget and civil service under a predominantly black interim council.  A1

HOPE AND ANGER FOR ARABS
Arab-Americans are optimistic about the proposed Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement, but many say that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, has settled for
too little.  A1


MOB DESCENDS ON JERUSALEM
Tens of thousands of protesters surrounded the offices of Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin, accusing him of committing treason by agreeing to a tentative peace plan
with the Palestine Liberation Organization.  A14

P.L.O. WRESTLES WITH WORDS
Palestine Liberation Organization negotiators searched for words to assure
Israel that they had abandoned armed rebellion against the Jewish state, but
stopped short of altering their charter.  A14

SECOND THOUGHTS IN UKRAINE
Ukraine is seen as a prosperous country with bountiful resources, but recent
concessions to Russia, including turning over the Black Sea Fleet, have led the
people to wonder what sovereignty really means.  A8

BOSNIAN LEADER COMES TO U.S.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, a leader in search of more land for the
Muslims, a reversal of "ethnic cleansing" and a free Sarajevo is carrying his
pleas to the United Nations and Washington.  A3

Sarajevans build a house from the stuff dreams are made of.  A3

ITALIAN WORKERS RIOT
After a violent night of rioting and fires in Crotone, Italian checmical workers
barricaded themselves in their factory to protest rampant unemployment in the
country.  A5

Canada's Prime Minister is to call a general election for Oct. 25.  A10

A lull between political storms in Venezuela.  A9

Koyasan Journal: Memorials to corporate culture.  A4

National A16-19, B10-12

GORE SETS TO TRIM GOVERNMENT
Vice President Al Gore announced a set of proposals that he said would
streamline government, save $108 billion over five years and cut 252,000 Federal
jobs by 1998.  A1

PAST HOLDS FEW SUCCESSES
News analysis: No one who has tried in the past to solve the problem of Big
Government can be confident that Clinton will succeed.  A1

The streamlining plan follows the path of Corporate America.  B10

LONG-TERM COVERAGE SOUGHT
The Administration's health plan will call for a new program to help finance
long-term care for people with severe disabilities.  A1

RETREAT ON TAX PLAN
Administration officials appeared to back away from the idea of limiting the tax
deductions that employers may take for the cost of employee health benefits.
B11

2 GUILTY IN BURNING CASE
Two white men were convicted of all charges in the burning of a black tourist
who said they taunted him with racial slurs, doused him with gasoline and set
him on fire.  A1

P.O.W. ISSUE STIRS CRITICISM
A Senator from New Hampshire is drawing criticism for accusing 10 officials of
perjury and other crimes, saying they were trying to cover up evidence about
Americans missing in Vietnam.  A16

LESBIAN IS DENIED CUSTODY
A court in Virginia upheld a lower court's decision to take a 2-year-old boy
away from his mother, a lesbian, and give him to her mother.  A16

SURGEON GENERAL CONFIRMED
The Senate confirmed as Surgeon General Dr. Joycelyn Elders, despite
conservatives' objections over her stance on sex education and abortion.  A18

PROSPECT FOR CIVIL RIGHTS POST
The corporation counsel for the District of Columbia has emerged as a top
candidate for the civil rights division in the Justice Department.  A18

NEW VIEW ON SHUTTLE ACCIDENT
A new book by the mother of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher who died in the
explosion of the Challenger in 1986, says that Ms. McAuliffe said the day before
the launching that NASA had decided to push ahead no matter what.  A19

NEW HOPE FOR TREATING TUMORS
A radical gene therapy treatment for brain tumors has proved promising in early
clinical trials, researchers reported.  B11

RIFT IN RELIGION AND MEDIA
A new study has concluded that a large misunderstanding exists between the news
media and religious leadership.  B12

Education Page B13

Dream in Detroit: 200 applicants for every spot at a new magnet school.
Campus Journal: Should a college on a California ranch go co-ed?

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-11

How do those cows do that?  C1
Agriculture Dept. emphasizing
nutrition.  C1

Health Page C12

A spreading mystery ailment linked to large reef-dwelling fish.
Personal Health: A dangerous folk "remedy" for MS.

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Italian orchestra threatens a
stereotype.  C15
Film: "The Joy Luck Club." C15
"Equinox." C20
Music: Womad festival discovers the U.S.  C15
Books: "Having Our Say." C19
Book Notes C16
Television: "Liberating America's Schools." C20

Sports B14-20

Baseball: Yankees lose and miss another chance at first place.  B15
Tennis: Courier is latest upset victim.  B15

Obituaries D21

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The latest reinvention.
For City Council from Manhattan.
Mary Cantwell: Mostar's bridge.

Letters

Bob Herbert: No job, no dream.
Lynn Martin: For children who have children.
David Rusk: Suburban renewal.

Bridge C13

Chronicle A24

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Claim of P.O.W. Cover-Up Rends Senate Decorum

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


In the Senate, where formal courtesies among members are ritual, a largely
unnoticed New Hampshire Republican is drawing unusual criticism from colleagues
for publicly accusing 10 senior, but even more obscure, Federal officials of
perjury and other crimes.

The Senator, Robert C. Smith, contends that the 10 were trying to cover up
evidence about Americans missing and perhaps captured in Vietnam. The issue has
been the overriding interest of his nine years in Congress.

In dry words reflecting more the civilities senators show each other than the
anger they felt, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts called Mr. Smith's
accusations "very unfortunate," and Senator John McCain of Arizona said they
were not "appropriate."

Senator Smith is a 52-year-old Vietnam veteran who says part of the motivation
for his intense interest in Vietnam prisoners comes from the fact that his own
father died in World War II in an airplane accident whose details his mother
never wanted to know or tell him about. He said he learned the circumstances of
his father's death only after he came to Congress.

Visit to Vietnam

Mr. Smith pushed for creation of the Senate Select Committee that investigated
Vietnam prisoners of war last year. As vice chairman, he signed the report that
said, "There is, at this time, no compelling evidence that proves that any
American remains alive in captivity in Southeast Asia."

But after a July trip to Vietnam, Mr. Smith said at a news conference here that
there now was "very compelling" evidence of live prisoners. "I can't go into
more detail," he said, "but after the conversations I had with the Vietnamese, I
can say again it's compelling evidence."

And in a June 29 letter to Attorney General Janet Reno, he accused the 10
officials of crimes aimed at covering up what he considers the Government's
botched efforts to find the truth. The officials deny the charges.

The letter, which Mr. Smith released first in Hanoi, Vietnam, and then in
Bangkok, Thailand, and Washington, angered two other Vietnam veterans in the
Senate: Mr. Kerry, a Silver Star winner who headed the select committee, and Mr.
McCain, a prisoner of war for six years who served on the committee. Both said
Mr. Smith's public charges recklessly endangered reputations.

'A Total Fiasco'

Mr. Smith contended in a two-hour interview last month that the overall American
investigative effort had been "a total fiasco." He said, "When you have got the
whole damn United States Government, and in this case, several other Communist
Governments, against you, it's hard."

But he also said, "I am not a conspiratorialist." He said he was pursuing the 10
officials because they had behaved improperly and perhaps illegally. He
explained his years of confrontations with officials by saying, "If you don't
raise hell on this issue and be aggressive and really push people, you don't get
any answers."

In the letter to Ms. Reno, he listed "potential Federal criminal violations" in
four areas: "false testimony and statements" (which, he has said, means
perjury), mail fraud, destruction of classified documents and improper
classification procedures.

Mr. Smith did not say then or in the interview which official he thought had
committed which crime, nor did he go into any detail. By the word "potential,"
he said he avoided impugning reputations.

Colleagues Dissent

His two colleagues, each of whom is senior to Mr. Smith, who has been in the
Senate for three years, disagreed with him in telephone interviews.

Senator Kerry said, "I would think it's very unfortunate to publicly drag people
into something by accusation, rather than simply to have an investigation
quietly and to determine whether something was worthy of putting their careers
in that vise."

Senator McCain said: "In my dealings with these people, it is clear that
mistakes may have been made in a very complex set of issues. But at no time was
there any indication that they were giving anything but their most dedicated
efforts. I frankly don't feel it's appropriate to publicly make these charges
without public substantiation."

Justice Department officials met with Senator Smith last month and are examining
his accusations to decide whether they merit a formal investigation. In
particular, they are exploring whether the charges, if proved true, would
actually constitute a crime.

'In Their Hands'

The department would not comment on its inquiry. Mr. Smith said: "We presented
them all of the evidence and documents that we had. And the agreement was that
they would pursue it and we would not comment further on it in any way. It's
basically in their hands."

Mr. Kerry said Mr. Smith had written to him explaining some of his charges
involving "false testimony and statements" allegedly made to senators or to the
select committee. "Speaking as a lawyer," he said, "I would have a hard time
making a case of perjury. You might make a case of sloppiness of diction or
memory."

One of the officials, Robert DeStatte, a civil servant with the Defense
Intelligence Agency whom Mr. Smith singled out for criticism and complained had
been "hostile to me, mocking me," said that as a Vietnam veteran and as a public
servant he felt personally obliged to bring out the truth about the fate of
missing American servicemen. But, he said, "unfortunately the facts, the truth,
about the issue are different from what some persons want to hear" -- that
American prisoners survived.

Mr. DeStatte, who spoke from Hanoi, where he is working with Vietnamese archives
on the war, said, "I personally have made every effort to provide Congress and
U.S. decision makers and the U.S. public the truth on this issue, and I stand
prepared now as always in the past to defend the truth of any statements I have
made."

List 'Was Very Focused'

Mr. Smith has clashed openly with many of the listed officials, all of whom
consider reports that Vietnam had American prisoners after the war to be very
doubtful or flatly untrue. Mr. Smith was also among several members of the
committee who complained in a final report that some officials of the Defense
Intelligence Agency had been "evasive, unresponsive and disturbingly incorrect
and cavalier."

Interviewed near his home in Wolfeboro, N.H., the Senator said the list "was
very focused." and added, "As a matter of fact, we drew up a bigger list and we
excluded some from it."

An aide to the Senator, Dino Carluccio, said: "There are some whom we hate the
most who we didn't put on the list. Only the things we had specific."

Besides Mr. DeStatte, these are the people Senator Smith asked Ms. Reno to
investigate:

*Duane P. Andrews, a former assistant secretary of defense for intelligence, now
in private industry.

*Warren Grey, a senior analyst at the Defense Intelligence Agency.

*Col. William Jordan of the office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs.

*Norman Kass, assistant to the acting secretary of defense for P.O.W./ M.I.A.
Affairs.

*Christopher LaFleur, until recently director of the State Department Office for
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia Affairs.

*Edward R. Ross, acting deputy assistant secretary of defense for POW/ MIA
Affairs.

*Col. Joseph A. Schlatter, Jr., deputy to Mr. Ross.

*Robert R. Sheetz, former chief of the special office for prisoners of war and
Missing in Action at the Defense Intelligence Agency.

*Charles F. Trowbridge, Mr. Sheetz's successor, the current chief of the special
office.

Col. Jordan and Mr. Kass were out of the country and could not be reached. The
others all denied lying to Congress.

Many of them have been repeatedly attacked by private citizens involved in the
P.O.W./M.I.A. cause, contending that they instinctively dismiss reports of
sightings of prisoners. Many of the 10 have been harassed and threatened by
telephone at home.

Anger and Concern

Among the accused, many were angered by the attacks, concerned that relatives
and friends might take the charges too seriously and afraid of the cost of
hiring a lawyer if the Justice Department went further. But several said they
did not want to be quoted by name because the Defense Department, for whom they
worked, often needed Senator Smith's vote on the Armed Services Committee.

For his part, Senator Smith defended the letter to Attorney General Reno by
saying in the interview first that it had not "incriminated anybody." He then
said that in listing the 10 names, he was making it clear that he was not
accusing more individuals. "I didn't want the image out there that somehow I was
conducting a secret investigation, that everybody was under a cloud," he said.

The Senator also said that releasing the letter had been a mistake. "In
retrospect, I probably shouldn't have done it," he said. He said he did so
because he was angry to find, on his trip to Vietnam, confirmation of the
existence of prisons that the D.I.A. had said did not exist, and because
reporters there had pressed him to say what he was going to do about it. The
letter was dated June 29 but was not made public until July 11, in Hanoi.

Mr. Smith also insisted that he had no intention of making a continuing campaign
out of his accusations. "If the Justice Department comes back and says there
isn't anything, so be it," he said. "It's over."


LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Robert C. Smith is drawing criticism from colleagues for
his campaign against Federal officials who he says have covered up evidence
about American prisoners after the war in Vietnam. (Dan Habib for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 144 words


Holtzman Loses Composure

Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman broke down while taping an interview, and an aide
cited the strain of a campaign-loan inquiry. Page B1.

Victory for a Steel Town

The fight to keep a company from closing a steel mill united a small Ohio town
in a long-shot battle, which in the end it won. Page D1.

Trade Pact Takes Back Seat

Focused on health care, the President has delayed any campaigning for the North
American Free Trade Agreement until late this fall. Page D20.

Furor on Pentagon Nominee

The nomination of Morton Halperin to be Assistant Secretary of Defense has
renewed ideological animosities dating from the Vietnam War. Page A21.

Diocese Finds No Miracle

Roman Catholic officials said no miracle had occurred at a New Jersey home where
a man claimed that the Virgin Mary had appeared. Page B1.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 923 words



International A3-15

P.L.O. SEES RECOGNITION PACT
As P.L.O. leaders began a crucial meeting in Tunis, a senior P.L.O. official
said a tentative agreement for mutual recognition had been worked out with
Israel.  A1

The United States settles into the role of Mideast hand-holder.  A12



A resignation threatened the Israeli leader's hold on Parliament.  A12

BOSNIAN APPEALS TO CLINTON
Bosnia's President, Alija Izetbegovic, asked President Clinton in Washington to
set a deadline to use force against the Serbs if they don't lift their siege of
Sarajevo. But Mr. Clinton's answer was essentially that the Bosnian leader
should get back to the bargaining table and cut the best deal he can.  A1

Croats admit that their Muslim captives face inhuman conditions.  A10

Staffing disputes hamper U.N. efforts to try war crimes.  A10

KLONDIKE IN JOHANNESBURG?
To the American companies flocking to Johannesburg, South Africa's deal on a
transition to democracy seems like a giddying opportunity because it could bring
an end to sanctions. But few South Africans expect the payoff to match the
euphoria.  A3

Gunmen killed at least 21 black commuters near Johannesburg.  A3

OLD FOES PLAY PEACEKEEPER
The United States and Russia signed an agreement providing for their army
divisions to conduct joint peacekeeping exercises.  A8

NEW DISCREPANCY ON P.O.W.'s
A new Russian document suggesting that Vietnam held more American prisoners of
war than it acknowledged in the early 1970's has been turned over to American
officials in Moscow. The Pentagon said it could not yet vouch for its accuracy.
A7

POLICE TERROR IN HAITI
Investigators say the Port-au-Prince police chief has become one of Haiti's most
powerful men by building a vast network of shadowy auxiliaries whose job it is
to intimidate or even eliminate rivals and opponents.  A5

INDIA WIDENS JOBS FOR LOW CASTES
The Indian Government decreed that half of India's federal jobs will be set
aside for the underprivileged. A similar proposal three years ago to reserve
more jobs for low-caste Hindus and other groups was set aside after weeks of
rioting, mostly by high-caste students.  A14

Colombia's capital is overwhelmed by growth and crime.  A15

Kidere Journal: Deprivation in Nigeria's "little Kuwait." A4

National A16-23, D20

LOOKING FOR HEALTH DOLLARS
The Administration has told Congress that its health plan will be financed in
part by trimming $124 billion from the projected growth of Medicare and $114
billion from Medicaid, lawmakers said.  A1

CONGRESSIONAL FIGHT PREDICTED
Members of Congress predicted that their most senior colleagues would work
behind the scenes to pick apart the Clinton Administration's plan to trim
government.  A1

RETURNING TO THE TRAIL
Political memo: The President and Vice President have revived the Bill and Al
Show to sell their plan to streamline government.  D20

Gore proves to be a hit on the "Late Show" with David Letterman.  D20

CLINTON DELAYS NAFTA CAMPAIGN
The President delayed a personal campaign for the North American Free Trade
Agreement to prepare for the health care fight.  D20

NOMINATION STIRS CRITICISM
The nomination of Morton Halperin to a new Pentagon post has stirred up
ideological animosities dating to the Vietnam War.  A21

STUDY CHALLENGES LITERACY RATE
Nearly half of the nation's citizens are not proficient enough in English to
write a letter about a billing error or solve simple arithmetic problems,
according to a Federal study.  A1

ANOTHER GERMAN TOURIST KILLED
In the latest attack on a tourist in Florida, a German man was fatally shot as
he was driving a rental car on the city's main expressway.  A16

RULING SHOCKS HOMOSEXUALS
The decision by a judge in Virginia to give a grandmother custody of her lesbian
daughter's son has given a legal shock to homosexuals.  A16

STUDY OF ABORTION PILL SOUGHT
A National Academy of Sciences panel said the French abortion pill, RU-486, and
other drugs should be studied as possible treatments for many health problems.
A17

SETBACK FOR LORENZO'S OIL
A study said Lorenzo's oil, subject of a recent movie, appeared to be worthless
for adults suffering from a rare inherited disease.  A18

Warning labels are being sought on aspirin and ibuprofen.  A18

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-11

How do those cows do that?  C1

Agriculture Dept. emphasizing
nutrition.  C1

Health Page C12

A spreading mystery ailment linked to large reef-dwelling fish.

Personal Health: A dangerous folk "remedy" for MS.

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Italian orchestra threatens a
stereotype.  C15

Film: "The Joy Luck Club." C15

"Equinox." C20

Music: Womad festival discovers the U.S.  C15

Books: "Having Our Say." C19

Book Notes C16

Television: "Liberating America's Schools." C20

Sports B14-20

Baseball: Mattingly is savoring September.  B15

Tennis: Courier is latest upset victim.  B15

Obituaries D21

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The latest reinvention.

For City Council from Manhattan.

Mary Cantwell: Mostar's bridge.

Letters

Bob Herbert: No job, no dream.

Lynn Martin: For children who have children.

David Rusk: Suburban renewal.

Bridge C13

Chronicle A24

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NOMINATION OPENS COLD WAR WOUNDS

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


President Clinton's nomination of Morton H. Halperin, a former official in the
Johnson and Nixon Administrations, to a Pentagon post has stirred up ideological
animosities dating from the Vietnam War.

A conservative advocacy group and a growing number of Republican senators are
leading the charge against Mr. Halperin, who used to direct the Washington
office of the American Civil Liberties Union and who is Mr. Clinton's choice to
become Assistant Secretary of Defense for Democracy and Peacekeeping, a newly
created job to supervise policies overseeing the use of international
peacekeeping forces.

Unlike critics of some of Mr. Clinton's other controversial choices, Mr.
Halperin's opponents seem to have no quarrel with the nominee's views on
contemporary issues.

Instead, they contend that Mr. Halperin's writings on cold war topics like arms
control, covert operations and the Vietnam War make him unfit to work at the
Pentagon. Mr. Halperin reversed his initial support for the Vietnam War,
advocated deep cuts in nuclear weapons and criticized many intelligence
operations.

'History of Extreme Views'

"He has a long history of extreme views on national security which put him well
outside the acceptable mainstream of defense policy, even among Democrats,"
Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking Republican on the Armed
Services Committee, said in a letter sent Tuesday to Republicans on the panel.
Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, has also expressed reservations.

A bipartisan group of supporters have begun a counterattack, asserting that Mr.
Halperin, perhaps best known for his long legal battle with Henry A. Kissinger
over the wiretapping of Mr. Halperin's home telephone in 1969, is the victim of
an orchestrated smear campaign intended to settle old scores.

"The accusations being made are false and unfair, and frankly not about terribly
relevant matters," Arnold Kanter, a senior official in the State Department and
National Security Council in the Bush Administration, said today in a telephone
interview.

No one is questioning Mr. Halperin's intellect (he graduated from high school in
two years and was a rising star at the Pentagon in the 1960's at the age of 29).
The debate turns instead on views that were controversial when he voiced them
decades ago but that now seem rather moderate.

The Senate is set to hold hearings on Mr. Halperin's nomination in the next two
weeks. Administration officials expect him to be confirmed, but some Republicans
predict a bloody fight.

Nunn Could Be Crucial

The nomination could well hinge on Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who
heads the committee. Mr. Nunn is not saying how he will vote, but he has shown a
taste for combat with the White House, opposing Mr. Clinton's pledge to allow
homosexuals in the military and most recently expressing reservations about the
American military involvement in Somalia.

Opposition to Mr. Halperin's nomination stems largely from The Center for
Security Policy, a conservative advocacy group here, and its director, Frank J.
Gaffney Jr., a Pentagon official in the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Gaffney's center published a slim volume of excerpts from Mr. Halperin's
writings over the years. "Using secret intelligence agents to defend a
constitutional republic is akin to the ancient medical practice of employing
leeches to take blood from feverish patients," the center quoted from "The
Lawless State: The Crimes of the U.S. Intelligence Agencies," of which Mr.
Halperin was a co-author in 1976.

Mr. Gaffney said he had never met Mr. Halperin and held no personal grudge
against him.

Rebuttal Attack

Mr. Kanter and two other longtime friends and colleagues of Mr. Halperin, Alton
Frye, a senior vice president of the Council on Foreign Relations, and Jeremy J.
Stone, president of the Federation of American Scientists, responded by
criticizing Mr. Gaffney's accuracy and publicizing accolades for Mr. Halperin
from Democrats and some Republicans in Congress.

After Mr. Clinton nominated Mr. Halperin, Senator David L. Boren, an Oklahoma
Democrat who used to head the Intelligence Committee, said, "We found that he
brought to the issues a determination to solve difficult problems in a
nonideological manner that reflected commitments not only to the defense of
individual liberty but also the requirements of national security."

Mr. Halperin demonstrated his principles when he sued Mr. Kissinger for
wiretapping his home for 21 months, beginning in 1969. Mr. Halperin dropped his
suit 19 years later after Mr. Kissinger apologized for his role in the
wiretapping, which had been ordered in an effort to find the source of news
disclosures about United States bombing in Cambodia.

The fight now is getting nastier. Mr. Gaffney has published a second volume that
includes rebuttals to rebuttals from Mr. Halperin's supporters on the first
volume. In a news release last week, Mr. Gaffney also called Mr. Stone "an arms
control zealot" and Mr. Kanter "an individual whose policy views are
sufficiently opaque to have permitted him to hold policy positions in the
Carter, Reagan and Bush administrations."

About the only person to remain above the fray has been Mr. Halperin, who is
under orders from the Administration to keep quiet until his hearings.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SOVIET FILE FEEDS DEBATE ON P.O.W.'S

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 858 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


A new Russian document suggesting that Vietnam held more American prisoners of
war than it acknowledged has been turned over to American authorities in Moscow.

The Pentagon released a translation of an account of a Vietnamese Communist
Party meeting held in late 1970 or early 1971, quoting a Vietnamese official,
Khoang Anya, as saying Vietnam held 735 "American aviator P.O.W.'s" although it
had only given out the names of 368.

Earlier this year another document from Soviet military intelligence files was
released, quoting another Vietnamese official as saying 1,205 Americans were
held in September 1972. Only 591 were released the next year after the peace
accords were signed.

The Pentagon, in a statement released Tuesday night, said it could not yet vouch
either for the statement's authenticity or its accuracy. The statement did say
it "came from the files of the G.R.U. -- Soviet military intelligence."

Senator Criticizes Pentagon

But Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who has made the cause
of missing servicemen the chief focus of his Senate career, called it "dramatic
and deeply troubling" and dismissed the Pentagon's reservations as "pitiful."

He said the new material was consistent with the 1972 document found by a
Harvard scholar in January and officially turned over to the United States in
April. It is now generally regarded by American officials as an authentic Soviet
intelligence document, although most of them believe it is not an accurate
record of the Vietnamese meeting it describes.

They also contend the Vietnamese could not have captured as many Americans as
they claimed to be holding at that time, and argue that the term "prisoners of
war" was not used by the Vietnamese although it was used in the account. That
term also appears in the new document.

Mr. Smith also said "these new revelations" were an additional reason why
President Clinton should maintain the trade embargo against Hanoi, which would
expire next Tuesday unless he acts. Senator Smith said that giving up this
"leverage" against Vietnam would "constitute abandonment of our remaining
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s."

What the Pentagon released on Tuesday was a translation from Russian of pages 11
and 18 from a report headed this way:

"General Staff of the Armed Forces of the U.S.S.R.

"Main Intelligence Directorate

"Top Secret.

"Copy No. ---

"Report

"Of Khoang Anya, secretary of the central committee of the W.P.V. at the plenum
of the C.C. W.P.V. at the end of December 1970 -- beginning of 1971

"(Translation from Vietnamese)"

The cover sheet and pages 11 and 18 were the only parts of the document given
last Thursday to Malcolm Toon, the United States co-chairman of the
American-Russian Joint Commission on P.O.W./M.I.A.'s. American officials said
the incomplete nature of the material would make it harder to analyze.

References to U.S. Prisoners

The most compelling reference to American prisoners came on page 18, where
Khoang Anya was quoted as saying: "The total number of American aviator P.O.W.'s
in the S.R.V. is 735. As I have already said, we have published the names of 368
aviators. This is our diplomatic step. If the Americans agree to the withdrawal
of all their troops from South Vietnam, we will, as a start, return these 368
people. And when the Americans withdraw their troops we will return to them the
rest."

In his earlier reference, on page 11, he said: "When we published the names of
368 American fliers, shot down and captured on the territory of the S.R.V.,
opportunists began to say this was a concession to the Americans. This is not
correct. It is not a concession, but a political blow aimed at Nixon. We have
achieved much through this."

The Vietnamese list of 368 prisoners was delivered in Paris, on Dec. 22, 1970,
to representatives of two antiwar Democrats, Senators J. William Fulbright of
Arkansas and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts. The total of 368 included 20
who had died of wounds or in captivity and nine who had already been freed. At
that time the Pentagon said the list did not include 10 airmen it believed were
prisoners, and 412 other Americans listed as missing in action, most of whom it
believed were dead.

Officials here would not discuss their preliminary view of the latest document.
But they were understood to believe that it had indeed come from the archives of
Soviet military intelligence and was probably an authentic document, but
referred to more American prisoners than could possibly have been captured, and
thus was based on sloppy or inaccurate reporting.

Stephen J. Morris, the Harvard scholar who unearthed the earlier document, said
in a telephone interview that he could not judge the validity of this one,
having seen only the translation.

But he said he believed that in translating back and forth between Vietnamese,
Russian and English, the name of the quoted official had been mangled. He said
the official appeared to be Hoang Anh, a member of the Central Committee of the
Vietnamese Workers Party and of its secretariat. He held a sub-ministerial
position in charge of resettlement.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words



International A3-14

ISRAEL AND P.L.O. IN RECOGNITION
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization opened a new era in their
violent history by recognizing each other's legitimacy and the rights of both to
represent their people's dreams.  A1

RESHAPING THE MIDEAST
News analysis: The Israeli-P.L.O. agreement fundamentally alters the political
and psychological maps of the region, and will reshape it more than any other
single event since Israel became a nation in 1948.  A1



P.L.O. PERSUADING MILITANTS
The P.L.O. appeared to be making breakthroughs in taming opposition to the
accords with Israel by Muslim militants and by the organization's leftist flank.
A1

Jordan plans to approve an outline of a draft accord with Israel.  A12

Palestinians in Jordan react with anger and encouragement.  A13

Over 180 Palestinians were allowed back into the territories.  A13

The practical aspects of creating two autonomous regions.  A14

MANY SOMALIS REPORTED KILLED
American and Pakistani forces opened fire on a crowd of Somali soldiers, women
and children after United Nations peacekeepers came under attack. Officials said
as many as 100 Somalis may have been killed in the fighting.  A1

HANOI REJECTS P.O.W. DOCUMENT
Vietnam rejected a Soviet document suggesting that Hanoi held more American
prisoners than it acknowledged in the early 1970's, saying the document resulted
from "misunderstanding of information or deliberate fabrication." A8

BOSNIAN APPEALS TO CONGRESS
Bosnia's President sought Congressional support for American participation in a
multinational peacekeeping force if a peace accord is reached by the warring
factions.  A3

TURKEY IN TALKS ON CAUCASUS
The Prime Minister of Turkey held urgent talks in Moscow as the five-year-old
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan threatens to draw in Turkey, Iran and
Russia.  A3

GREECE DISSOLVES PARLIAMENT
The Prime Minister of Greece dissolved Parliament and called early general
elections after losing a parliamentary majority because dissenting deputies in
his conservative party withdrew.  A6

CUBA APPROVES PRIVATE BUSINESS
Cuba took another step toward establishing a mixed economy by authorizing
limited, individual private enterprise in a wide range of trades, crafts and
services.  A5

Soukre Journal: Haiti's ancestral religion, Vaudou, or voodoo.  A4

National A16-20, B8

PACT IN BREAST-IMPLANT DISPUTE
Lawyers in bitter lawsuits over silicone breast implants said they were
proposing to create a $4.75 billion fund to compensate women who say the
implants harmed them.  A16

FORCING DOWN DRUG PRICES
The Clinton Administration has told Congress it wants the Government to review
prices of new prescription drugs so that Medicare coverage can be denied those
whose prices are deemed excessive.  A17

A CITY THAT REALLY DOES WORK
If the President has his way, all of America will operate like the highly
computerized, relentlessly self-evaluating city of Sunnyvale, Calif.  A18

MORE GOVERNMENT TO GET LESS?
In his first official act of "reinventing government," President Clinton created
a new committee, the Community Enterprise Board. Just what it will do and how is
unclear.  A18

Political debate as hip sound bite: Al Gore on David Letterman.  A18

TEXAS SENATOR TAKES THE FIFTH
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas appeared before a state grand jury
investigating her tenure as state treasurer but apparently refused to answer
questions.  A16

ASPIN DEFENDS 'STAR WARS' TEST
Defense Secretary Aspin said that the United States developed a secret plan in
1983 to deceive the Soviet Union about the progress of the "Star Wars" program
by rigging crucial tests but that the scheme was never actually carried out.  B8


NEW TRIAL IN NEW YORKER CASE
A Federal district judge ordered a new trial in the libel case between Jeffrey
M. Masson and Janet Malcolm over a profile she wrote of him for The New Yorker
but severed the magazine from the case.  A20

GAY JOURNALISTS STEP FORWARD
Homosexual journalists have become sharply more visible in news organizations
and are changing the scope and treatment of news.  A20

GERMANS RE-EVALUATE FLORIDA
After the Wednesday slaying of a German tourist in Miami, travel agents in
Germany said they expected that tourists might begin choosing other
destinations.  B8

Dr. Kevorkian is ordered to stand trial in assisting a suicide.  A16

A drug to treat Alzheimer's disease won Federal approval.A19

Law Page B9

A black A.C.L.U. lawyer defends a Klansman, angering the N.A.A.C.P.

At the Bar: Is the Supreme Court still relevant? Probably.

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-28

American fashion at the Met.  C1

A landsman goes whale-watching.  C1

Poster art for collectors.  C1

Kasparov and Short draw in Game 2.  C21

For Children C23

Theater: Critic's Notebook C2

Film: "Samba Traore." C3

"True Romance." C5

"The Seventh Coin." C5

"Leon the Pig Farmer." C8

"Crush." C8

"The Real McCoy." C10

Restaurants C20

Art: Modern's director resigns.  C3

Self-portraits in prints and photographs.  C13

Movement monger's many moods.  C19

Arthur Murphy's Social Realism.  C25

Books: "A Tidewater Morning." C27

Television: TV Weekend D18

Sports B11-17

Baseball: Abbott can't enjoy his no-hitter.  B11

Owners approve realignment.  B11

Blue Jays lose another.  B12

Columns: Vecsey on U.S. Open.  B11

Anderson on Chavez-Whitaker.  B17

Tennis: Pioline and Masur in semifinals.  B11

Obituaries B10

Helen O'Connell, big-band singer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Beyond the shock of recognition.

Judge Wachtler heads for prison.

Start on national service.

For City Council from Brooklyn.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Bosnia -- empty promises.

Roger Harrison: Israel can live with the risks.

Joseph Nocera: Bulls, bears and us.

Bridge C21

Chronicle B4

Crossword C26

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Inside Art

BYLINE: By Carol Vogel

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words



SoHo's Grand Reopening

In these precarious economic times, SoHo dealers are betting there is safety in
numbers (not to mention increased visibility). Tomorrow, to inaugurate the fall
art season, more than 30 galleries and nonprofit spaces in lower SoHo will have
simultaneous openings from 5 to 8 P.M. The dealers have decided to make the
event a virtual block party, with Wooster Street closed to traffic between Grand
and Broome Streets.

"Last year we called each other in order to plan our openings on the same day;
this year we decided to formalize it," said Ann Philbin, the director of the
Drawing Center, a nonprofit exhibition space at 35 Wooster Street. "It's really
a way to break open the season and not be depressed about it," she added,
alluding to several recent seasons of poor business.

Many dealers said the block party was also an attempt to attract an audience
beyond the usual art crowd. "This has become such a diminished community," said
Lisa Spellman, the owner of the 303 Gallery on Greene Street. The block party,
she said, is "aimed at getting people who don't normally visit art galleries, so
SoHo won't seem so insular and myopic." Jay Gorney, another dealer, added, "The
industry has taken a lot of bashing lately, and the block party is proof there's
still life in SoHo."

The event may also make people aware of the number of galleries (now 17 in all)
that have clustered around the block bounded by Wooster, Broome, Grand and
Greene Streets. A majority are run by dealers in their 30's, although there are
also some older, established presences like Brooke Alexander, whose Brooke
Alexander Editions gallery at 476 Broome Street will open with an exhibition of
work by John Baldessari, probably the best-known artist involved in tomorrow's
event.

Indoors and Out

Other artists include Alexis Rockman, who will show his macabre images of nature
at Jay Gorney Modern Art; Lorna Simpson, whose politically acute photo-works
will open at the Josh Baer Gallery at 476 Broome Street, and Raymond Pettibon,
who is inaugurating the Feature Gallery's new space at 76 Greene Street. Solo
debuts include those of Cheryl Donegan, a video artist, at the Elizabeth Koury
Gallery, 89 Greene Street, and Jason Rhoades at David Zwirner, 43 Greene Street.
Andrea Zittel (at the Andrea Rosen Gallery, 130 Prince Street), Tony Feher (at
Wooster Gardens, 40 Wooster Street), Peter Nadin (at Brooke Alexander), Maureen
Gallace (at the Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery, 51 Greene Street) and Stephen Westfall
(at the Daniel Newburg Gallery, 43 Greene Street) are all making return
engagements.

An independent curator, Simon Watson, has organized an outdoor evening of music
and poetry readings from 8 to 10 in a space he calls "the lot," on the southeast
corner of Broome and Wooster Streets. James Elaine, the assistant director at
the Drawing Center, has organized the entertainment, which will include a folk
group, the Murmurs, and Billy Basinski, a singer and saxophonist, both from
Williamsburg, Brooklyn, as well as two downtown poets, Bobby Miller and Todd
Colby.

"Because there will be so many people milling around on Saturday evening
gallery-hopping, we thought it would be fun to also show off the downtown talent
of poets and performing artists," Mr. Watson said.

Besides these galleries, at least two dozen others in SoHo are opening tomorrow,
so the entire neighborhood could become one large party.

The Newcomers

The SoHo gallery merry-go-round, which started this summer, continues unabated.
By far the splashiest name in the group is that of John McEnroe, whose inroads
into the professional side of the art world became known last winter when he
went to work for the Salander O'Reilly Gallery on East 79th Street in Manhattan.
Now, the tennis star is opening a by-appointment-only contemporary-art gallery
on Greene Street, the John McEnroe Gallery.

Helping Mr. McEnroe run the operation is Robin Zindell, who was also at Salander
O'Reilly. While Ms. Zindell declined to comment on the particulars and Mr.
McEnroe was unavailable while serving as a television commentator at the United
States Open in Queens this week, word in the art world is that the gallery will
open in October. Whether this is a preliminary step to becoming a public gallery
or just another back room resale space for blue-chip art remains to be seen.

Despite the poor market of recent years, other brave folk have decided to open
galleries, despite the slump. Peter Blum, a print publisher who has been running
a private gallery for prints and art books on West 10th Street since 1980, is
opening a space this month at 99 Wooster Street where he will show one-of-a-kind
works as well as editions and books. "I think this is a good time," he said.
"There is certainly interest out there." His first show, "The Collinasca Cycle,"
will feature a series of 12 wood block prints by David Rabinowitch. Mr. Blum
said he would continue working on print editions with artists like Louise
Bourgeois, James Turrell and the Japanese artist Yukinori Yanagi.

Another newcomer is TZ'art, which opens on Sept. 28 at 28 Wooster Street.
Described as a cross between a commercial gallery and an alternative space,
TZ'art is run by Frederieke Sanders Taylor, formerly the director of the
Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture in Skowhegan, Me., and Tom Zollner,
the former director of Gallery Three Zero on Bond Street. The two dealers plan
to hold regular six-week shows, beginning with an exhibition,
"Naturalunnatural," featuring contemporary artists like Mel Chin, Carol Hepper
and Eve Andree Laramee. "We see ourselves as different from the blockbuster
arena of the 80's," Ms. Taylor said, adding that the gallery planned to hold
lectures and panel discussions around each exhibition.

Keeping Their Day Jobs

Two other new spaces are being run by dealers moonlighting from full-time jobs
at established galleries. Frederick Petzel, the director of Metro Pictures, is
running a gallery out of his home at 591 Broadway, between Houston and Prince
Streets. It is open Tuesdays through Fridays from 2 to 8 P.M., and the shows
will change every four weeks. Opening next Friday is an exhibition of six
sculptures and a video by Paul Myoda, an American of Japanese descent. "I wanted
a space to show younger artists," Mr. Petzel said, "ones who don't have a chance
to show at bigger spaces."

More temporary is Basilico Fine Arts, run by Stefano Basilico, a co-director of
the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo. Mr. Basilico doesn't have a permanent space, for
the moment, so he is working out of 21 Mercer Street, where the gallery
Fiction/Nonfiction was before changing its name to Jose Freire and moving to 130
Prince Street. On Oct. 1, Mr. Basilico's temporary gallery opens with a
monthlong show of work by the sculptor Michael Rees. The gallery is open
Saturdays, Sundays and Mondays only, from noon to 6 P.M.

For November, Mr. Basilico plans a group show, "Ghost Limb," which will include
works by Ronald Jones and Haim Steinbach (both Sonnabend artists), Matthew
Antezzo and Laura Stein. While he hasn't nailed down a location for the November
show, the dealer doesn't seem fazed by the peripatetic nature of his venture.
"Different artists require different spaces," he said. "This way I can find the
proper venue for shows."

Meanwhile, two permanent galleries will soon be found in new locations. James
Danziger, the photography gallery, is moving from 415 West Broadway to a bigger
space at 130 Prince Street, where the Rubenstein/ Diacono gallery abruptly
closed this summer. Mr. Danziger's new gallery opens on Sept. 22 with a show of
portraits taken by Judith Joy Ross at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington, to be followed by "Short Stories: Celebrating 25 Years of Vogue
Fashion by Grace Coddington." And Richard Anderson is moving to larger quarters,
too: from 63 Thompson Street to 2,100 square feet on the second floor of 476
Broome Street, near Wooster Street. His first show, opening on Oct. 6, will be
paintings and works on paper by Hugh Steers.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: "Soho Block Party" shows sites of participating galleries.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM REJECTS P.O.W. DOCUMENT

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 9


Vietnam today rejected a Soviet document suggesting that Hanoi held more
American prisoners of war than it had acknowledged in the early 1970's,
asserting that figures in the document resulted from "misunderstanding of
information or deliberate fabrication."

A Foreign Ministry spokesman, in Hanoi's first formal comment on the report,
said North Vietnam held 580 American and allied prisoners when the Paris peace
accords were signed in January 1973. Two months later, after United States
forces withdrew, Hanoi released 591 American prisoners.

"Since then and up until now, no American prisoner of war has been held in
Vietnam," the spokesman said. "This is the truth. All other figures on the
American prisoners in Vietnam are not correct because of misunderstanding of
information or deliberate fabrication."

The Pentagon said the document, a translation of an account of a Vietnamese
Communist Party meeting held in late 1970 or early 1971, quoted a Vietnamese
official as saying North Vietnam was holding 735 "American aviator P.O.W.'s,"
although it provided the names of only 368.

The Second Document

The newly released document, from Soviet military intelligence, was given to
American officials at a meeting in Moscow. Although the document quoted comments
supposedly made about prisoners at a the Vietnamese Communist Party meeting, the
Foreign Ministry spokesman said the issue was not discussed at the time.

A furor erupted in April after the publication of another document from Soviet
archives, which Vietnam also denounced as a fabrication, that suggested that
Hanoi held 1,205 American prisoners in 1972.

But the controversy had died down by July, when President Clinton made a major
concession to Hanoi by taking steps to lift a United States ban on new lending
to Vietnam by the International Monetary Fund and other multilateral agencies.

Mr. Clinton is due to decide by next Tuesday whether to renew his authority to
maintain embargoes against Vietnam, North Korea and Cuba.

More Delays Likely

He is expected to renew them, despite improvements in relations between Hanoi
and Washington this year that have given Vietnam and American businesses the
hope that the President would take steps to end the embargo against Vietnam. But
it appeared likely that the new document would at least delay any such action.

Moreover, Mr. Clinton would find it difficult to move in this direction if there
were any doubt about Vietnam's truthfulness on determining the fate of the 2,248
Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina.

After the Pentagon released the document this week, Congressional critics of
Vietnam urged Mr. Clinton not to lift the embargo.

Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican, said Wednesday that the
document was "dramatic and deeply troubling." It indicated that "several hundred
more American P.O.W.'s should have been returned by the North Vietnamese, and
were not, for whatever reason," he said in a statement faxed by his office.

Mr. Smith said he had urged President Clinton to keep the embargo to maintain
leverage on Vietnam and "to do anything less would constitute abandonment of our
remaining P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Havana Will Permit Some Private Enterprise

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Sept. 9


Cuba took another step toward establishing a mixed economy today by authorizing
limited, individual private enterprise in a wide range of trades, crafts and
services.

The decision, announced in a decree law signed by President Fidel Castro,
effectively ends a virtual state monopoly of production, employment and sales.

More than 100 trades and services were declared open to individual, private
enterprise. These include taxi drivers, mechanics, plumbers, carpenters,
painters, hairdressers, cobblers, cooks, domestics, craftsmen, farm products
salesmen and even computer programmers.

Although some very limited individual economic activity had been allowed in the
past, foreign diplomats in Havana said the range of trades and services now
opened up represented a major step toward allowing private initiative in an
economy completely dominated by the Cuban state.

Senior Cuban finance officials recently visited China and Vietnam, and the
diplomats said the move might have been influenced by their examples of private
enterprise co-existing with a state-controlled economy.

Self-employed private entrepreneurs will be allowed to benefit directly from
their work. "Direct sales to the population of goods and services produced by
these workers will be permitted," a statement released by the state Finance and
Labor Committees said.

The statement outlining the new regulations said prices could be negotiated
between buyers and sellers.

The move is one of a group of economic changes being carried out by the
Government in response to a crippling economic recession, which began with the
collapse of Cuba's trade and aid ties with the former Soviet bloc. In August,
the authorities removed a ban on Cubans' owning and using hard currency like
dollars.

The published regulations bar university graduates, especially doctors, and
company directors and management personnel from taking part in private economic
activities, or working on one's own account. But workers, especially those
unemployed or only partly employed, homemakers and retired people have the right
to exercise private enterprise, as long as they do not employ other people.

However, diplomats said it was clear that the newly authorized private
enterprise would be carefully regulated by the state. People will have to seek
permission from local authorities to exercise private economic activities and
will pay a fixed monthly charge. The authorities will monitor the activities to
make sure "intermediaries and parasites" do not appear.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 11, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 3; Style Desk

LENGTH: 182 words


Former Defense Secretary ROBERT S. McNAMARA has signed with Times Books, a
division of Random House, to write his memoirs, it was announced this week. The
book, which is scheduled for publication in 1996, will deal with his experiences
as the president of the Ford Motor Company, president of the World Bank and
chief of the Pentagon 1961 to 1968, the period of the American military build-up
in Vietnam.

PETER OSNOS , who is publisher of Times Books and who will edit the memoirs,
said yesterday: "It is his intention to make this a chronicle of the Vietnam
decision-making that really stands the test of time. The book will answer some
very difficult questions."

In a statement issued by Times Books, Mr. McNamara said: "I have observed that
policy makers commenting on their own actions consciously or unconsciously seek
to justify them. I have not done so in the past, and I do not propose to do so
in my book.

"However, I have concluded that some of the lessons which could be drawn from
the decisions we made about Vietnam are applicable to the world today and
tomorrow."

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: September 12, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  57   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      1   3      WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                                                              in North Vietnam.

 3      3   5   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                     of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                                         woman and for the woman's first lover.

 4      5  22          LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                                                      woman on a Mexican ranch.

 5      6  26        THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                     secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                                      presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 6      4   6    STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                 A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                                                       train robber and killer.

 7          1      THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                 Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                                                            his secret admirer.

 8      7   9       THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                   hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                                                  and international terrorists.

 9      9  12      PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                  The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                                                             Cherokee daughter.

 10         1         STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 11*    8   4    THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.)
                             The second volume of "The Tamuli," a fantasy saga.

 12         1                   THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern.
                   (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero,
                                      including his rebirth in the near future.

 13*   10   7    A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
                 (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a
                                                            surgeon's daughter.

 14    11  15        PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                  $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a
                                                      multimillion-dollar fund.

 15    14  12   CRUEL & UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
                  Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed
                                                                    for murder.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  18      EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                    (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2          1   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                  on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                                                               show "Seinfeld."

 3      2   4      MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                    suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                                                               ways and places.

 4      3  57         WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                                                      understand their psyches.

 5      4   9         LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                     psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                                                    effects on a person's self.

 6      7   3            THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                      (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                                                                      behavior.

 7      5  14        REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                       Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                                                                    innovation.

 8      6  52      THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                    $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.

 9      9  13            THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                  journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                                                                 of the 1950's.

 10     8  39     CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 11    11  14         MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                 $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                                                         and radio commentator.

 12    10   9   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House,
                            $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.

 13    13  12       DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                                     $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

 14    12  30           HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.)
                Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship
                                          of sickness to thoughts and emotions.

 15    14  15   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy
                                       marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   7    AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                                              A physician's advice about aging.

 2      3  17            MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                        (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                                               relationships between the sexes.

 3      2  11    EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                                                            Counsel about diet.

 4      4   2    FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins,
                 $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 28, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.  CRAZY IN ALABAMA, by Mark
Childress. (Putnam, $22.95.) Southern American humor yet again, but in a novel
that pounds every convention of the genre into submission; not even the dead
bodies interfere with the funniness.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children,
by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some
"home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others
believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.)
This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life
defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &
Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where
James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS, by Sherri Szeman. (HarperCollins, $17.50.) A powerful
novel, forged from refractory materials: the personal narratives of a death camp
commander and the Jewish woman he chose as his mistress.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE . . . : A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to
MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold
analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea
surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
NEW YORK DAYS, by Willie Morris. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) Mr. Morris's memoir of
his star-crossed romance with Harper's Magazine, where he became editor in chief
in 1967, just in time for the weirdest part of the 60's, and held on till 1971.
SADE: A Biography, by Maurice Lever. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A life of
the French aristocrat and novelist (1740-1814) so wicked they renamed wickedness
in his honor, so to speak.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid,
highly literate personal account by the fortunate recipient of a miracle, a
distinguished historian who slowly lost his eyesight and suddenly got it back.
SIGNS OF DEVOTION: Stories, by Maxine Chernoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Smart,
antic short stories in which people understand new experiences by recalling old
ones, and the trivial is examined until its importance transpires.
SLEEPING BEAUTIES, by Susanna Moore. (Knopf, $22.) This eloquent, disturbing
novel, concerned with personal and historical identity, squeezes its heroine
between outdated notions of femininity and repulsive exemplars of womanhood.
THEIRS WAS THE KINGDOM: Lila and DeWitt Wallace and the Story of the Reader's
Digest, by John Heidenry. (Norton, $29.95.) A hugely detailed, engagingly
written history of a single bright idea and the preacher's kids who ran that
idea into a multibillion-dollar global enterprise.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Science Fiction

BYLINE: By Gerald Jonas

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


Is William Gibson mellowing? The initiator of cyberpunk, who brought a new
stylistic bite to science fiction with his 1984 novel "Neuromancer," has not
quite turned into a futuristic Pollyanna. But compared to his earlier work,
VIRTUAL LIGHT (Bantam, $21.95) offers more likable characters, a more subdued
style, a less claustrophobic setting and a more upbeat ending.

Cyberspace -- Mr. Gibson's term for that amorphous computer-generated realm
where information becomes geography -- plays a relatively minor role in his new
novel. Instead of focusing on hackers obsessed with surfing the binary waves, he
places at the center of his story two young people in a near-future San
Francisco, a bike messenger named Chevette and a security guard named Rydell,
who may actually have a flesh-and-blood future of their own, together.

Chevette, whose bike is moderately high-tech, gets her hands on a pair of
super-high-tech sunglasses, which contain secrets that some powerful people are
willing to kill for. Rydell, who discovers to his regret that he is working for
the same people, eventually calls on a shadowy band of hackers for help. Mr.
Gibson can write lean, mean action scenes, and his plot is so economically
constructed that a reader who is not paying close attention may miss a crucial
lead or two. Not to worry. Mr. Gibson's main interest, as always, is in creating
a near-future world that can hold its own with the mind-bending reality of the
present.

If the text of "Virtual Light" reveals the precise year in which the story is
set, I missed it. But Mr. Gibson has other ways of delineating time and place.
On hearing his new employer mention that his grandmother is Vietnamese, Rydell
thinks to himself: "Saigon was where rich people went on vacation." You are
invited to fill in the date for yourself. It may help to know that California
has split into two states -- SoCal and NoCal -- and that since an earthquake
known as "the Little Grande," the Bay Bridge linking San Francisco and Oakland
has been closed to traffic and the still-intact center span has become a
squatters' paradise, home to thousands of ex-hippies and formerly homeless
people who have built themselves a new self-governing community: "At night,
illuminated by Christmas bulbs, by recycled neon, by torchlight, it possessed a
queer medieval energy."

Through a steady accretion of clearly imagined detail, Chevette's and Rydell's
world comes to seem no queerer than our own. When Rydell gets into his
employer's expensive car, his keen eye takes a quick inventory: "Four-wheel
drive. Ceramic armor. Goodyear Streetsweepers you'd need a serious gun to
puncture. There was a cardboard air freshener, shaped like a pine tree, hanging
in front of the heater vent." I was especially taken with the Fallonites, a
religious sect who believe that watching old movies on television is a form of
meditation and that if they watch long enough "the spirit will sort of enter
into them."

The final word on this latest installment of Mr. Gibson's speculative future
belongs to a sociologist named Yamazaki, who maintains his scientific detachment
even when he gets caught up in the action. Yamazaki's study of the unique
society taking shape on the bridge prompts this reflection:

"We are come not only past the century's closing, he thought, the millennium's
turning, but to the end of something else. Era? Paradigm? Everywhere, the signs
of closure.

"Modernity was ending."

Undaunted, Yamazaki continues his research, "feeling for the new thing's strange
heart."

William Gibson is a dewy-eyed optimist compared to Elizabeth Hand, whose ICARUS
DESCENDING (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $5.99) is set in the mid-25th century but
whose point of view is chillingly fin-de-siecle. As one character says to a
talking ape who represents innocence incarnate: "There's always a war, Scarlet!"
When mutated viruses are not literally raining down from the skies and radiation
is not seeping into bones and genes, mad scientists are creating mutant clones
and half-mechanical warriors in a Human Engineering Laboratory that more than
earns its acronym of HEL.

"Icarus Descending" is set in the same shattered America that formed the
background of Ms. Hand's earlier books "Winterlong" and "Aestival Tide."
Although the publisher says that the new novel can be read independently, and
Ms. Hand interpolates copious synopses throughout her narrative, I cannot
imagine a reader who is unfamiliar with the earlier novels making much sense out
of the complicated plot and intricate cross-references. And without a grounding
in that shared history, it might be difficult to work up any anxiety over the
threat posed by an onrushing meteor called Icarus to a world "that has already
been twisted and burned and poisoned beyond all hope."

Ms. Hand occasionally strains for a poetry of decadence, interrupting the litany
of scientific horrors with such archaisms as "fulvous" and "rubeous" in the
manner of Gene Wolfe's "New Sun" series. But these touches serve only to remind
the reader of all that has been lost in a future so dark that the impending
annihilation of "civilization" seems more like a deliverance than a punishment.

Poul Anderson has been writing science fiction for over 40 years. In 1989 he
published one of his most successful novels, "The Boat of a Million Years," an
adroit study of the mixed blessings of immortality. HARVEST OF STARS (Tor/Tom
Doherty, $22.95) reads like something salvaged from a drawer of old rejects.
Anson Guthrie is the irascible but lovable founder of Fireball Enterprises, a
company that dominates space travel in the solar system. Unlike all other
monopolies in history, Fireball is neither inefficient nor corrupt, possibly
because Guthrie, who has achieved a kind of immortality as a computer "download"
after his body gives out, commands not just loyalty from his staff but a
literally feudal devotion in which Fireball employees "plight troth" to their
chief as he battles government baddies to win personal freedom and humanity's
passage to the stars.

If this is Mr. Anderson's attempt to re-create the simple pleasures of the pulp
magazines of the 1950's, he has only succeeded in proving that you can't go home
again. "Harvest of Stars" is overwritten, underimagined and fatally flawed with
self-satisfied musings on life-according-to-Guthrie that read suspiciously like
the author's own self-justifications: "Back then, I too did my share of reading.
It wasn't the fashionable stuff, no. Shakespeare, Homer, Cervantes, they might
be acceptable, if outmoded, but Kipling, Conrad, MacDonald, Heinlein, that ilk,
they were insensitive reactionaries. Or racists or sexists or whatever the
current swear word was. You see, they dealt with things that mattered."

CORE, by Paul Preuss (Morrow, $23), is a savvy, hard-science techno-thriller
about the hardest science of all. Cyrus Hudder, a maverick geologist, discovers
a new substance, dubbed hudderite, that is so hard it can be used to drill into
the molten core of the earth. When Cyrus disappears, his disaffected son,
Leiden, is left to carry on the family tradition of brilliant if erratic applied
science.

Mr. Preuss has obviously done his homework, as evidenced by dialogue in which
Leiden Hudder's patent attorney notes: "But the fraction of elements in the
plasma beam has not been the same as the stoichiometric fraction. . . . I mean,
aren't the non conducting elements generally underrepresented?" Fearful perhaps
that readers will not stick around for the answers to such questions, the author
stuffs his plot with enough political intrigue and earth-shaking perils to plump
out a big-screen movie script, which this novel seems all too eager to become.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Missing Out on a Glittering Market

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2308 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


LES MUSIAL assumed that Malaysians lived in "straw huts or something" when the
Chrysler Corporation dispatched him to Southeast Asia last year to help open its
first manufacturing operation in the region in more than a decade.

Chrysler made him feel no more comfortable about the assignment when a company
doctor presented him with 10 pounds of medicines -- "for malaria, for tropical
diseases" -- apparently in the belief that local supplies might be lacking.

But Mr. Musial's qualms about Malaysia were upended the minute he landed at the
marble-lined international airport here in the capital and began driving into
one of the most modern cities in Asia, with residential neighborhoods that could
be mistaken for California suburbs.

"I saw the skyscrapers, lots of skyscrapers, and the manicured lawns," he said.
"There were good, new cars on the road. I thought that the technology and the
industry would be in the beginning stages. But then you see the factories, and
they are so advanced that you could put them anyplace on earth."

Mr. Musial was seeing for himself what many American business leaders have not
yet seen, or have chosen to ignore -- that Southeast Asia is in the midst of an
economic revolution that in several nations is creating glittering wealth where
once there had been only abject poverty, and that Americans are welcome to
profit from it.

Over the last decade, Southeast Asia has been the fastest-growing economic
region on earth. Collectively, the major non-Communist nations of the region --
Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the Philippines -- already
have a vast manufacturing base, and they are quickly creating a market here for
imported goods. Among the more than 400 million people of Southeast Asia, a
large and growing middle class is clamoring for American goods -- even as the
market for American products has faltered in Japan and in Europe.

So why aren't more American companies here?

American businesses offer several answers to that question -- from the
perception of widespread corruption among government bureaucrats in the region
to the frustrations of doing business halfway round the world from the home
office. But the larger reason that Americans shy away may be simple ignorance
about the opportunities here.

An Ambassador's Plaints

"We've really had to beat on American companies to get them out here," said John
Wolf, the United States Ambassador to Malaysia, recounting his frustration in
trying to persuade American companies to open marketing offices here and to bid
on big government infrastructure projects, including this city's new $3 billion
airport. "The place is in the chokehold of the Japanese, even though there is a
fantastic potential for Americans."

To be sure, American investment in Southeast Asia has grown substantially in
recent years, but the pace of Japanese investment has been much faster.

According to the Japanese Finance Ministry, that nation's cumulative investment
in Asia, most of it in Southeast Asia, has tripled from $20 billion in 1985 to
$60 billion at the end of last year. The latest total is almost double the $32.2
billion that the Commerce Department shows American companies have invested in
the region, although the figures are not perfectly comparable because of
different statistical methods.

The companies that account for most of the new American investment in the region
are the same giants -- including Exxon, I.B.M., Coca-Cola -- that have been
operating in Southeast Asia for years. More than 40 percent of American
investment in Southeast Asia is in a single industry: petroleum.

In July, Chrysler began manufacturing right-hand-drive Jeep Cherokee utility
vehicles in a plant just outside Kuala Lumpur, the company's first manufacturing
operation in Southeast Asia since it pulled out in the late 1970's to deal with
a severe domestic slump. Kmart announced last month that it would open stores in
Singapore in its first large venture in Southeast Asia.

Yet Chrysler and Kmart are the exceptions to what American diplomats and members
of the American business community here say is a distressing rule.

"There is an amazing lack of understanding as to the potential of Southeast
Asia," said Roger Bertelson, general manager for Malaysia for Motorola, which
has four factories in Malaysia and employs 12,000 people. With high-technology
investments like Motorola's, Malaysia is now the world's largest exporter of
computer chips.

"There needs to be a swift kick in the rear end for American businesses," said
Robert D. Orr, the former American ambassador to Singapore, the futuristic
city-state that functions as the hub of Southeast Asia's economic miracle. "I
just don't think they understand what has happened in Southeast Asia."

Impressive Numbers

The numbers bear out the opportunities. The economies of the six nations that
make up the Association of Southeast Asian Nations -- Indonesia, Malaysia,
Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines and Brunei -- have collectively experienced
annual growth of 7 percent over the last decade. They grew 5.3 percent last year
-- still impressive in light of the recession among Asean's large Western
trading partners.

With 328 million people and a gross domestic product of more than $350 billion,
the six Asean nations are already the fifth-largest export market for the United
States, after Canada, Japan, the European Community and Mexico. Adding
neighboring Taiwan and Hong Kong, Southeast Asia is a $600 billion economic
powerhouse.

The export markets for American goods in Japan and Europe have stagnated since
1990, but the export market to the Asean nations has grown by more than 26
percent, reaching $24 billion last year.

There is still wrenching poverty in Southeast Asia. Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar
(formerly Burma) remain among the poorest nations on earth and after years of
upheaval, the Philippines has fallen far behind its non-Communist neighbors. But
the overall trend in Southeast Asia is one of solid growth, stable governments
and open markets.

The region's largest nation, Indonesia, home to 184 million people, has seen per
capita income rise from $250 in 1985 to nearly $650 today, and seems likely to
see it double again within a decade.

Despite concern that Indonesia could someday fragment along ethnic lines --
there are scores of major ethnic groups and hundreds of languages among
Indonesia's 13,000 islands -- American investors already in the country say the
risk seems far off, and they speak with enthusiasm about the Government's
prudent economic planning, vast natural resources and cheap labor.

Malaysia is poised to become one of Asia's next economic tigers, notably through
the development of high-technology industries. Singapore, with its enlightened
economic planning and rigid social engineering, has emerged as the region's
financial and technological center. Thailand's economy continues to grow rapidly
despite political upheavals and a succession of recent governments.

And Vietnam, with 70 million people and a well-educated, low-wage labor force,
is widely thought by foreign investors to be on the verge of an economic boom
that will accelerate if President Clinton follows through on hints that he will
lift, at least partly, an American trade embargo that dates from the Vietnam
War.

In a few stretches of Southeast Asia, incomes approach, or even surpass, those
of Western European nations. In Singapore, the per capita income is more than
$15,000. In tiny, oil-rich Brunei, it is more than $17,000 -- wealth for buying
imports.

Robert E. Driscoll, president of the U.S.-Asean Council, a Washington-based
trade group that represents American companies doing business in the region,
said that among Southeast Asians, "There is a cachet to owning American." Still,
American business has largely ceded the market to Japanese competitors.

Detroit's Regret

In Bangkok, Jakarta and Singapore, Southeast Asia's yuppies crowd expensive
department stores bearing the names of Japanese retailing giants. The upper end
of the small appliance market is virtually monopolized by Japanese brands, as is
the auto market.

Detroit's decision in the 1970's to shut down Southeast Asian manufacturing
operations just as the automobile market here was about to explode "was a
shortsighted decision made on the basis of huge domestic losses and a need to
restructure at home," Mr. Driscoll said. And now the price is being paid, as a
generation of newly affluent Asian carbuyers buy Japanese.

The reluctance of more American businesses to establish operations here
perplexes the Southeast Asians.  "You have to be an absolute fool not to make
money here," said Noordin Sopiee, director of Malaysia's Institute for Strategic
and International Studies. "Our markets are open to you. Many people speak
English. We watch your television shows."

He attributes the American absence from the market to a basic American ignorance
about Asia, particularly Southeast Asia. "They don't think of us," he said of
Americans.

Mr. Orr, the former ambassador to Singapore, recalled attending a March 1992
dinner in Manhattan held to drum up interest in Southeast Asian investment among
prominent New York bankers and executives. "The dinner became a little testy
because many of the people in the room were quite defensive," he said. "They
kept saying they were wary of Southeast Asia after getting their fingers burned
in South America and in other third-world countries."

No Latin America

Comparisons between the prudently planned economies of today's Southeast Asia
and the disastrous, debt-laden economies of South America in the 70's and 80's
are distressing to those who know this region. The dinner was evidence to Mr.
Orr that "people just don't understand the indigenous wealth of Southeast Asia
and what is happening there."

The reasons for the absence of new American investors go beyond simple
ignorance. Widespread government corruption in the region has frightened away
many potential American investors who are justifiably wary of violating American
laws that forbid the payment of kickbacks and bribes abroad. Few large
government projects in Indonesia, the Philippines or Thailand are won by foreign
contractors without at least the whiff of corruption or insider connections.

Still, American executives operating here say that the corruption is no more
prevalent in Southeast Asia -- and may actually be less so -- than in other
parts of the developing world.

"An awful lot of American companies refuse to engage in corrupt practices and
succeed in Southeast Asia," said Mr. Driscoll of the U.S.-Asean Council. "It may
take a little bit longer to get business done. You may lose a couple of
contracts. But once you've learned the business system, it's a problem that can
be overcome."

Other potential investors shy away because of the inconvenience of doing
business halfway around the world from most of the United States. It is easier
for a New York investor to search out business opportunities in Brussels, seven
hours flying time, than in Bangkok, 19 hours, and most Americans have ancestral
ties with Europe, not Asia.

"It is not as difficult to do business in Asia as some potential investors seem
to think it is," said Mr. Bertelson of Motorola. "But in Asia it does take
patience. Relationships are very important here. And the relationships take
time. Unfortunately, Americans are not the most patient people."

As a result of their impatience, many American businesses are missing out on
what is in general a liberal, welcoming climate for foreign investors and
exporters. In the larger nations of Southeast Asia, foreign investors can own
100 percent of a business in most industries; there are government guarantees
that foreign-owned businesses will not be nationalized; the governments are
flexible about allowing foreign companies to send their profits home.

When they do consider Asia, many potential American investors think not about
Southeast Asia but about China or Japan.

But investment in China carries risk. While the Chinese economy's annual growth
rate is now approaching 13 percent, many economists warn that it may be on the
verge of overheating. Corruption is a growing problem. And the protectionist
barriers are far higher in Japan than in the large nations of Southeast Asia.

"Japan is a huge market, but there are many more obstacles to getting into it,"
said Phil Curran, managing director for the Thailand division of Digital
Equipment, the computer maker. "The argument you can make for Thailand,
Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore is that you can hit the ground running, you
can get productive quicker, and you can start taking your money out quicker."

In contrast to Digital's upheavals at home in the United States, its operation
in Thailand has grown phenomenally since it began in 1988. Business in Thailand
grew 46 percent last year, reaching $70 million. A recent survey of 3,000 Asian
business people, most of them in Southeast Asia, found that more than 50 percent
had invested in desktop computers in the last year.

Why No Eastern Europe?

The commercial counselor in the American Embassy in Kuala Lumpur, Paul Walters,
said that among many Americans, "there is almost a fear of the unknown about
Asia."

In the United States, he said, he encountered companies that were moving quickly
in Eastern Europe, where there is only a small fraction of the industrial
capacity and affluence of Southeast Asia.

"I see these companies spending all of their time in Eastern Europe, even though
there's no money in Eastern Europe to speak of," he said. "And in the end,
nothing comes of it. If these same companies came to Southeast Asia, they'd find
the people here are ready to deal with them -- and have the money to spend."

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 1)

Map/Charts: Map of Asia, indicating Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei,
Philippines and Indonesia. Charts present economic sketch of each country,
indicating prospects for future growth. (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SEPT. 5-11: Civilian Casualties;
Anxiety Over Somalia: Shots Fired in Mogadishu Are Heard in the Senate

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


After American helicopter forces inflicted heavy casualties in confronting a
hostile crowd in Somalia last week, Congressional opinion about the American
operation there went from wary to angry.

Lawmakers were already in a sour mood when they returned from their summer
recess on Tuesday, grumbling that while they were off on vacation the Clinton
Administration had expanded the military's mission from humanitarian aid to
pacification and nation-building.

But Senators grew far more upset two days later over the news that American
helicopters had sprayed gunfire and rockets into a crowd of Somalis, including
women and children, after Marine engineers and Pakistani troops were attacked in
Mogadishu, the Somali capital, by supporters of Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid, the
fugitive warlord. The Aidid camp said more than 100 people were killed, but the
toll could not be confirmed.

Alarmed, the Senate overwhelmingly passed a resolution calling on the
Administration to submit a report formally defining its goals. More important,
it set the stage for Congressional votes by Nov. 15 to sanction the operation or
discontinue it.

"We went to Somalia to keep people from starving to death," said Senator John
McCain, an Arizona Republican, during a debate that conjured up the ghosts of
Vietnam. "Now we are killing women and children because they are combatants."

It took furious lobbying by the Administration to stave off a tougher resolution
that could have cut off the operation within two months. The House will take up
the issue this week.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. SEEKING CURBS ON CLINIC ATTACKS

BYLINE: BY RONALD SMOTHERS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Sept. 11


With civil rights laws proving futile as a means of curbing violence at abortion
clinics, Justice Department lawyers have begun examining the criminal statutes
in the hope of finding tools to assert Federal authority in the emotional
conflict.

The review comes at a time when the advocates of abortion rights concede that
they are losing ground and that the availability of abortions is becoming a
problem in some areas.

The search for applicable criminal laws, by the Justice Department's terrorism
and violence unit, began at the request of Attorney General Janet Reno after the
wounding of a Wichita, Kan., abortion doctor on Aug. 19, said John Russell, a
department spokesman.

Earlier in the year, Dr. David Gunn, 47, was fatally wounded outside the clinic
where he performed abortions in Pensacola, Fla., and at that time Ms. Reno asked
the Justice Department's civil rights division to see if there was a way for the
Federal authorities to become involved in the case.

Rights Laws Don't Apply

"But there were no civil rights laws applicable," Mr. Russell said. "We are now
examining how Federal criminal laws might be utilized to combat acts of violence
in connection with abortion clinics and it is in the very preliminary stages at
this point."

Heightening the sense of urgency was the shooting death in Mobile, Ala., of a
third abortion doctor. That incident came just two days after the shooting in
Wichita, but in subsequent investigation the authorities concluded that the
killing was unrelated to the abortion issue.

Federal involvement in abortion violence cases would be applauded among abortion
rights advocates along the stretch of the Gulf Coast that includes the northwest
corner of Florida and Alabama. The region has become identified with fiercely
violent protests against the medical workers who provide abortions and their
patients.

Since the shooting of Dr. Gunn on March 10, three clinics have closed, out of
the six that once served a 100-mile stretch of coastal communities where about
850,000 people live.

Unrelenting Pressures

Not only was Dr. Gunn killed, but clinic workers have also been stalked by
protesters and some anti-abortion figures, including a Roman Catholic priest,
have openly advocated violence, including the killing of doctors who performed
abortions as "justifiable homicide."

The closings have added to the pressures on clinics that have remained open,
said Pat Mitchell, the director of the Mobile Lady's Center.

And while the death of the Mobile physician, Dr. George Wayne Patterson, was not
related to his work, it has complicated the problem for the abortion clinics in
the region because he had taken over much of Dr. Gunn's work.

The Pensacola Women's Medical Services Clinic, where first Dr. Gunn and then Dr.
Patterson worked, remains open, but has had to bring in a doctor from more than
1,000 miles away -- officials would not disclose the specific location -- to
perform the late-term abortions that are its specialty.  Also remaining open is
the Pensacola Ladies' Center, which performs only first trimester abortions.
That clinic's doctor travels about four hours from Jacksonville, Fla.

But now closed are the clinic in nearby Fort Walton Beach, which Dr. Patterson
owned, as well as his clinics in Mobile, the Bay City Women's Center and Family
Planning International.

'Climate of Terror'

Kate Michelman, the director of the National Abortion Rights Action League
acknowledged that these were among the signs that the advocates of abortion
rights were beginning to lose ground. "They have created such a climate of
terror and violence that provider availability is rapidly becoming the Achilles
heel of the pro-choice and reproductive freedom movement," she said.

The types of criminal laws that the Justice Department might try to enforce are
not being disclosed. Officials like Mr. Russell and the department's chief
spokesman, Carl Stern, have declined to discuss the specifics.

Advocates of abortion rights say, however, they believe that one possibility is
the Federal conspiracy statute, although that route is risky. Because of the
political nature of the abortion controversy, some analysts say, charges of
conspiracy would have to be solidly based or the entire effort could be
dismissed as merely a political attack, much as Vietnam War protesters were able
to label some Justice Department actions in the 1960's.

Still, people involved in providing abortions and their allies say some
intercession is needed. "We are dealing with a bunch of terrorists and not some
little old grandmothers carrying picket signs," said Sandy Sheldon, assistant
director of Pensacola Women's Medical Services.

In recent days, the most noteworthy case has been in a state jurisdiction, not a
Federal one. Michael F. Griffin, 31, who is accused of killing Dr. Gunn, had
been insisting through six months of preliminary court proceedings in Florida
that he would represent himself, but this week he agreed to hire a lawyer. Judge
John Parnham of Escambia County Circuit Court granted a postponement of the
trial, which had been scheduled for Sept. 20. The trial is now scheduled for
Dec. 6.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Powell Says He Feels Obliged to Stay in Public Life

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


As he prepares to leave the military, Gen. Colin L. Powell says he feels an
obligation "to do something in public life" after taking time off to write his
memoirs and enjoy private life. That "does not suggest politics to me right
now," he added, but he would not rule it out.

In an interview with The Associated Press on Thursday, the retiring Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff discussed his 35-year military career, which
officially ends on Sept. 30 when Gen. John Shalikashvili takes over the post.

General Powell was the first black Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and the youngest
man ever to hold the office. As the nation's top military officer during the
Persian Gulf war, General Powell became well known and his stock as a possible
political candidate rose.

Service in Some Way

In the interview, General Powell gave the strongest indication yet that he did
not intend to disappear from the public arena. "I don't want to spend the rest
of my life giving speeches," the 56-year-old general said.

"I feel, just as an American citizen, and because of the position I have
reached, I think there will be an obligation on me to do something in public
life," he said. "So while I am going out to acquire something of a private life
again and spend more time with my family and get off stage for a while, I think
in due course I would like to be seen as serving the nation in some way."

General Powell said such a development "does not suggest politics to me right
now," but he also said he would not rule anything out.

"It suggests that I should find ways to use the experience I have and use the
position I have achieved in some way to help communities across the country, to
help young people," he said.  "I feel an obligation to help young people,
especially minority young people."

General Powell, who was born in Harlem, grew up in the South Bronx. He graduated
from City College of New York with a major in geology and a commission in the
Army Reserve Officers Training Corps. He was wounded twice in Vietnam.

He was named national security adviser in 1987 by President Ronald Reagan and
was named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs in 1989 by President George Bush.

At one point, the interview was interrupted by a call from President Clinton.
When General Powell returned, he said, "The bombing begins in five minutes," a
reference to Mr. Reagan's joke that was inadvertently broadcast early in his
first term.

General Powell said he was most proud of the fact that despite the reduction of
United States forces with the end of the cold war, he had been able to persuade
two Presidents that the military force "can't be demobilized or ripped apart."

In Charge of Reduction

"We've not lost control of the process," he said. Under his tenure, the number
of United States forces is expected to drop to about 1.4 million from a high of
2 million.

On a current military issue, General Powell said he would advise that America
not "cut and run" from Somalia, now that the situation has become difficult.

"I think we have to stay there for the foreseeable future to continue to play
our part in the U.N. effort," he said. "And it will be very, it seems to me,
unwise for us to suddenly pull our troops out. It would be devastating to our
hopes for the new world order."

After he leaves office, the general plans to write his memoirs, for a reported
$6 million. He will also give speeches, although his aides said he had not yet
signed up with any lecture bureaus.

"I am going to write a book because I have some things I want to say, some
thoughts I want to pass on," General Powell said. "I have had a wonderful life.
I've had a great experience in the military, and I want to put my side down on a
number of the issues I've been involved in over the years -- but that isn't
going to take me forever. I don't want to spend the rest of my life giving
speeches."

NAME: Colin L. Powell

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
My Bum Bill, My Secret Sharer of the Streets

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 13; Page 1; Column 3; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


WHEN I moved to the block, my bum Bill owned the beauty salon's corner. He never
begged; he mooched off smaller, older bums who sat against a whitewashed brick
wall and read paperbacks while Bill smoked and paced and harangued them.
"Reality," he would shout through the prematurely white beard that covered his
lips, "what do you know about reality? You're bums."

He yelled at me for strolling through his sidewalk seminar. I didn't catch the
words, but the tone was pure outrage at my rude invasion of his space. He was in
the middle of a lecture on the worthlessness of four readers snoozing in the
morning sun, and he seemed to be quoting from a book in his hand that had no
cover. Because he was so big, broad as well as tall, I couldn't let him
intimidate me or I'd be crossing three streets instead of one to get my paper. I
glared at him and growled like a dog. He wearily shook his head and rolled his
bright blue eyes and waved me through.

It was the first step toward staking a claim to my own block, even if it meant
acting loony, but everything costs in this city. We all cope with bums. And the
edge we need to face them every day -- in fact the edge we need just to cope
with our block -- tends to both wear us down and keep us sharp.

I began to nod whenever I passed him, and while jogging one morning I began
singing: "My bum Bill, he's as tall and as tough as a tree. Is Bill." That's how
he got his name.

Then the entire reading group disappeared. Weeks later, only Bill came back and
now he was begging. His white hair was shoulder length and streaked yellow with
nicotine, and he was limping on a right foot sloppily wrapped in dirty bandages.
He was an aggressive toll collector, shoving his crumpled paper coffee container
in my face. I didn't give him a dime. I stoked my attitude with jokes; Bill has
lost his corner teaching job and is applying for street grants.

But his rude invasion of my space was no joke. I was resentful. "Outta my face,
Bill," I snarled. There was a short period during which I would actually cross
to his corner just to challenge him. This was when I began to think of myself as
OF the block, not just ON it, and of Bill as some kind of secret sharer helping
me find my street legs.

Meanwhile, he was drinking more and more, leaning against the brick wall, his
blue eyes filming over. Week by week, he escalated his props, a soft shoe over
the bandages, a cane, crutches. He began whining, then just begging with his
eyes. My resentment became intense dislike. Why should you be here, Bill,
fouling the quality of my life? If my mood was dark enough, I might say it out
loud.

He disappeared for a very long time. There were moments when my urban rage
needed a focus and I actually missed him. Was he dead, in Potter's Field? In a
hospital, a shelter? Sometimes my fantasies were wistful. Relatives had shown up
to take him in, clean him up: a long-estranged father or son. Psychological
drugs, counseling, a reconciliation with the head of his department. At this
very moment, he was on a Guggenheim re-writing the book on reality that had
snapped his mind.

And then he reappeared in a wheelchair, without his right leg.

Let's waste no sympathy on how bad I felt. I have felt bad before. Urban guilt
is for those who give up, who just want to say they're sorry. I decided that
Bill was my bum now: a dollar a day when I saw him, a fiver on holidays and my
personal celebrations. (If this makes print it's twenty.) And no strings. I did
not care whether he spent it on the Gallo Brothers or half a pair of Guccis. I
also did not want to make friends with him, follow him to where he slept or
invite him home to Thanksgiving.

I faltered once last year, on a day when he seemed unusually alert, almost his
old bombastic self. I asked, "How did you lose your leg?" and he looked at me as
if I was crazy. "Vietnam." All I could say was, "Have a nice day, Bill," and he
growled, "Name's Mike."

But most of the time his head lolls and his eyes are that dark and soapy
washing-machine blue. He has crossed to the corner in front of the pizzeria,
which has more traffic. Sometimes he wears an exposed prosthesis. When he
displays his raw stump, the plastic leg hangs from the back of his chair
alongside an old book bag.

There are more bums in the neighborhood now, some young and predatory. One day,
after I paid my Bill, a bum hawk began to circle and I said, "Don't even think
about it," and he said, "The guy's almost dead, I'm hungry," and I growled,
"You'll be dead, too," and he sidled away. I might have been feeling tougher
because my son, an Alphabet City rocker, was covering my back.

We were halfway down the block toward home when the bum hawk doubled back and
struck. I took off screaming, how could you rob a bum, you bum, but I was lucky
and he escaped.

When I got back, Bill was nodding out and my son said, "You're as crazy as they
are." I thanked him for that and stuffed another dollar in Bill's pocket. What
do I know about reality? I just live on this block.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT MEN;
Flag-Wavering

BYLINE: By George Packer;  George Packer is the author of "The Village of
Waiting," a memoir about Africa, and "The Half Man," a novel about a reporter in
the third world.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words


Just before my 22d birthday, while I was undergoing Peace Corps training in an
African village of mud huts and pygmy goats, a volunteer twice my age told me,
"You're doing what young men used to do when they joined the army back in the
19th century."

She was right, though I didn't know it until that moment. My purpose in going to
Africa was not to save anyone's life but to test myself, to have an adventure in
the world, even, in a phrase so old-fashioned it makes me blush, to become a
man.

But it never occurred to me to enlist in the military. I grew up in the 60's and
70's on a liberal university campus, where it was taken for granted that anyone
in a uniform was certainly stupid and possibly cruel. For me this feeling was
based on no firsthand experience, since the only servicemen I knew were my
father and other men of his generation, who fought before anyone could consider
it a badge of shame and idiocy. By the time I was 8 or 9, my attitude toward war
had split in two. I sometimes wore a peace button, and two raised fingers did
not mean victory to me. I was deeply impressed by the flower poster that read,
in childish handwriting, "War Is Not Healthy for Children and Other Living
Things." I was all for Eugene McCarthy, to whom I wrote an earnest letter
advising, "Get out of Vietnam and into Biafra."

One summer at camp, after a couple of shots at the target, I let the riflery
instructor know that my parents had told me to excuse myself from shooting. The
instructor, a young redneck in jeans and cowboy boots, was disgusted. "Is your
dad one of them radicals or something?" I said I guessed so, since, as an
8-year-old, I didn't know what the word meant (he was not at all). The
principles on either side also meant nothing to me, but since my aim had been
miserable, I was happy to be let out.

At the same time, I was obsessed with World War II, and could have told you
exactly how many Americans died on Omaha Beach. I was proud of the fact that my
father had served on a destroyer in the Pacific, and I longed for an experience
like that to happen to me. My friends and I spent hours running around with
plastic pistols, or setting up re-creations of the Battle of the Bulge with tiny
lead tanks. Vietnam was wrong, but World War II was heroic. War wasn't healthy
for us and other living things, but we couldn't think of anything as exciting.
We had inherited one set of ideas and another set of instincts, and they both
made perfect sense.

Later, after war games lost their glamour, I settled into a mindless contempt
for uniforms and flags. My friends and I chattered and joked through the
national anthem at college basketball games; a hand over the heart, a solemn
mouthing of the words, would have brought ridicule. Though we were not loudly
anti-American, no one in my neighborhood raised a flag on Memorial Day, and the
Fourth of July block parade was long on crepe-papered bicycles and short on
patriotism. The word itself still embarrasses me slightly, like "school spirit"
or "become a man." I didn't feel it was wrong, just a little trite. It evoked
the atmosphere of Kipling's poem "If" and the Boy Scouts.

When President Carter brought back draft registration, there was a lot of
agonizing among my college friends over the principle of resisting, and the fear
of getting caught. I found the latter more compelling and signed up, though I
made sure to do it in Mobile, Ala., where I was working for the summer, giving
my temporary address. Needless to say, I never heard a word from the Selective
Service, and my life's only real gesture toward the military was lost in
bureaucratic or postal oblivion -- which was fine with me. If, after college,
I'd announced I was entering a Buddhist monastery, it would have appalled my
family and friends less than if I'd enlisted. But the Peace Corps earned me warm
congratulations.

It turned out that the emotions I felt when I was 8 hadn't been completely
snuffed out. In Africa I realized that the need for those experiences men find
in the service -- danger, physical discomfort, a break with home, camaraderie,
commitment to something larger than personal ambition or pleasure -- doesn't go
away simply because you've been brought up to despise the military. Perhaps the
Peace Corps recognized this emotional function in adopting so much of the
military's jargon: "in country," "staging," "med-evac," "close of service," even
its very name. In the 60's the Peace Corps was a way for young men to avoid
going to Vietnam, but it also made them feel as though they'd endured Vietnams
of their own, which cleansed some of the guilt of having opted out of the real
one. It would be foolish to compare hardships in an African village to the
terror of combat. The only comparison I'm making is psychological. The desire
for courage and honor and sacrifice persists in spite of the fact that all the
patriotic songs have been ruined by Lawrence Welk.

But since I still belonged to a political culture that held the lyrics in
suspicion and contempt, it was a long time before I knew that my feelings about
patriotism and the military had begun to change. Oliver North's testimony before
Congress both appalled and riveted me. He was grandiose and fanatical, and I
hated the dirty little war that made his heart rise.

But I couldn't share my friends' utter scorn. "Salute smartly and charge up the
hill" -- a glib phrase, yet it spoke to emotions that "War is not healthy" left
cold. North was devoted to a cause, though it happened to be the wrong one. I
kept my ambivalence to myself. It worried me that something about North's
upturned chin seemed attractive, as if I'd been taken in by a bad war movie. And
the battle lines were rigid: It was impossible to say that his brand of
patriotism didn't make patriotism itself a disgrace.

In the middle of the gulf war I found myself trying to persuade a friend that
the American flag stood for America, not for Jesse Helms. I put my argument in
political terms: it was a mistake to allow one's ideological enemies to make an
exclusive claim on emotions that so many people deeply feel. And a generation of
young men who have learned to kill every impulse that reminds them of Oliver
North is diminished by the loss of what they might have discovered, as I did, at
8.

Now that the cold war is over, and an antiwar demonstrator has become President,
and the military has gotten out of Vietnam and into feeding civil war victims in
Bosnia and Somalia, perhaps even enlightened people can be patriots without fear
of ridicule.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 944 words



International A3-17

SIGNED, SEALED AND SHAKEN

Months of secret negotiations were sealed with signatures and perhaps even more
significantly, handshakes, when Israeli and Palestinian leaders met on the South
Lawn of the White House.  A1

Dancing, toasts and resignation in Jericho, Israel and Syria.  A17



CLINTON'S BURDEN NOW

After the secret meetings, the drama and the pageantry comes the diplomatic
drudgery, and in this case, both the Israelis and the Palestinians have made it
clear they will be leaning on President Clinton.  A1

Insomnia, indecisiveness and incredulity behind the scenes.  A1

Arafat comes armed -- with two olive branches.  A15

VIETNAM EMBARGO IS RELAXED

In a further easing of its economic stance, Washington said that American
companies could bid on construction and development projects financed by
international lending institutions in Vietnam.  A10

SOMALIA, WHERE PEACE IS SCARCE

Peacekeepers are everywhere in Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, but peace
itself remains elusive. Heavy weapons are in evdience, United Nations troops are
ambushed on patrols and clans settle their differences with bullets.  A3

WORLD COURT RULES ON BOSNIA

The World Court did not grant Bosnia's request to be exempted from the United
Nations arms embargo, but it did demand immediate compliance from Belgrade with
orders to cease committing or sponsoring acts of genocide in Bosnia.  A5

A new Japanese economic stimulus plan expected.  A7

Mexican leaders are trying to change election laws.  A8

China releases one of its best-known dissidents.  A6

Gyor Journal: Profit and risk on the eastern frontier.  A4

National A18-23

BLUE-COLLAR VIEW OF TRADE PACT
If there is an emotional heart to the movement against the North American Free
Trade Agreement, it may be in Flint, Mich., among the auto workers who fear that
the agreement is one more devastating blow to a way of life.  A18

PARKS PLAN TO REQUIRE INSURANCE
In what could be the first step in ultimately charging a range of fees for
recreational use of public land, the National Park Service announced it was
going to require mountain climbers to pay for rescue missions.  A18

SMITHSONIAN DIRECTOR TO RETIRE
Robert Adams, the ninth person to head the Smithsonian Institution in its
147-year history, announced that he would retire next year and return to writing
and teaching.  A20

LAST YEAR'S PROBLEMS PLAGUE BILL
Caught in election politics, a major crime bill died last year as Republicans
and Democrats refused to compromise on capital punishment and gun control. This
year was supposed to be different, but officials are expressing reservations
about the bill's prospects.  A22

STUDY FINDS DAY-CARE SHORTAGE
Working-class parents in the South and Midwest have the greatest difficulties in
finding preschools in their neighborhoods, according to a study by the Harvard
Graduate School of Education.  A20

OLD ARGUMENTS USED IN GAY CASE
The Clinton Administration, using legal arguments that Bill Clinton the
candidate had sharply criticized, appeared in court to defend the old policy
that banned homosexuals from the military.  A23

PUSH TO END HOUSE SECRECY RULE
Fueled by the support of Ross Perot and conservative talk show hosts,
Republicans are gaining ground in an effort to gut an arcane House procedural
rule that allows members to block legislation in secret while supporting it in
public.  A22

A judge dismissed a suit filed by apple growers against CBS.  A21

Metro Digest B1

Sports B11-17

Baseball: Steinbrenner lays down challenge.  B13

Phillies shut out Mets.  B13

Basketball: Equality dispute costs coach her job.  B11

Boxing: Judge's misunderstanding may have hurt Whitaker.  B14

Columns: Moran on Lou Holtz.  B11

On Baseball B13

On Pro Football B14

TV Sports B17

Football: Giants' defense a pleasant surprise.  B14

Jets rally round Esiason.  B14

Hostetler boosts Raiders.  B15

Browns defeat 49ers.  B15

Hockey: Devils' coach relaxes atmosphere.  B17

Sports People B16

Tennis: Not an Open to remember.  B17

Track and Field: Another record for Chinese women.  B13

Obituaries B9

Raymond Burr, actor.

Rita Karin, actress.

Business Digest D1

Fashion Page B10

Brave new jeans warriors.

Patterns

Science Times C1-9

War of words in the controversy over global warming heats up.  C1

Jocelyn Elders promises to be an outspoken Surgeon General.  C1

Migraine headaches are yielding some genetic clues.  C1

Questions raised about overuse of laparascopic appendectomies.  C3

The "truck gardens" of ancient Mexico City to flourish anew.  C4

Personal ComputersC6

Q&A C8

Peripherals C8

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Tharp shows her creative process.  C11

Music: Music Notes C11

City Opera's "Mikado." C11

Carole King at the Beacon.  C12

Nyro at the Bottom Line.  C12

Ney Matogrosso.  C14

Dance: Saz Dance Theater.  C14

Books: "Sleeping Beauties," by Susanna Moore.  C15

Television: John Larroquette and Bill Hicks.  C16

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

"Enough!"

Illiterate Americans.

New York City primary choices.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Now, what Arabs can do.

Russell Baker: Mercy on us all!

Rashid Khalidi: Blind curves and detours on the road to self-rule.

Chronicle B5

Bridge C16

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 552 words



Companies

Texaco plans to sell its Texaco Chemical unit and almost all of its worldwide
chemical operations to the Utah billionaire Jon M. Huntsman for $1.06 billion.
[Page D1.]

The interests of retired auto workers, more than any other issues, are driving
labor negotiations with Detroit this year. [D1.] With a deadline looming
tonight, Ford and U.A.W. officials continued to predict they would agree on a
new contract. [D5.]

I.B.M.'s chief executive reshuffled the computer giant's management by creating
an 11-member executive committee. [D1.]

Two laboratories agreed to pay the Government $39.8 million to settle charges of
false claims for blood tests. [D1.]

The nation's airlines cut fares by up to 45 percent on domestic flights through
Dec. 16. [D1.]

Stock in Paramount Communications rose in part on news of the pending takeover
and in part on the expectation that another bidder might yet emerge. [D2.]

Du Pont will dismiss 4,500 employees in its domestic chemical business by
mid-1994 to cut costs. [D4.]

Smith Barney's efforts to cut costs since its merger with Shearson have run
afoul of Mellon Bank. [D4.]

Eastman Kodak's investors may be wondering about the company's resolve to change
its ways. [D4.]

Sonoco Products will acquire Engraph for about $300 million, extending its reach
into consumer packaging. [D4.]

United Air Lines reached an accord to sell 15 flight kitchens to the Dial
Corporation for $119.4 million. [D7.]

AmSouth Bancorporation agreed to buy Fortune Bancorp of Clearwater, Fla., for
about $285 million in cash and stock. [D14.]

Lloyd's of London disclosed the terms under which corporate investors will be
allowed to invest in its market. [D14.]

Caterpillar's profit this year will be increased by $300 million as a result of
a favorable settlement of a Federal tax dispute. [D15.]

Spelling Entertainment agreed to acquire Republic Pictures for $100 million.
[D21.]

The Economy

The heart of the movement against the North American Free Trade Agreement may be
in Flint, Mich., among auto workers who fear for their way of life. [A18.]

International

American and European officials labored to prevent a dispute over farm subsidies
from tearing apart world trade talks. [D3.]

Japan is expectd to announce on Thursday its third program in a year to
stimulate the nation's economy. [A7.]

The Clinton Administration will allow American companies to bid for Vietnam
projects financed by the World Bank. [A10.]

Compaq Computer has complained about a Japanese decision to buy 2,000 notebook
computers from NEC. [D15.]

Markets

Stocks posted modest advances, partly because of the lowest oil prices in three
years. [D8.]

Treasury bonds ended little changed, despite expectations of positive inflation
news. [D18.]

The dollar rose against most leading currencies in anticipation of fresh reports
on the economy. [D20.]

Gold and silver prices continued to slide amid expectations of continuing slow
economic growth. [D20.]

Today's Columns

America West is showing signs of life, but that may not be a reason to buy the
airline's stock. Market Place. [D8.]

Some retailers of men's apparel are offering incentives to their best customers.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D21.]

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Eye on Olympics, China Frees Top Dissident

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 333 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Tuesday, Sept. 14


In a move apparently timed to influence the decision on where to hold the 2000
Olympics, China today released its most famous political prisoner after he had
served all but six months of his 15-year prison term.

The Justice Ministry announced that Wei Jingsheng, a champion of free speech,
was being released on parole. Chen Ming, an official with the Ministry, told the
Associated Press that he was freed "because he abided by prison regulations and
obeyed the rules."

He was released just nine days before the International Olympic Committee is due
to chose a site. Western nations have been putting increasing pressure on the
International Olympic Committee to consider China's poor human rights record in
making its decision on whether to hold the games in China.

A Fifth Modernization

Mr. Wei, an electrician at the Beijing Zoo, was arrested in March 1979 during
the crackdown on the Beijing Democracy Wall movement and was later sentenced to
the harsh 15-year term because of the magazine he edited and the posters he
produced. The posters criticized Deng Xioaping, China's paramount leader, and
called for a "fifth modernization" for China -- democracy. China's "four
modernizations" are industry, agriculture, defense and science.

Mr. Wei was also accused of leaking state secrets involving the movement of
Chinese military forces during the country's 1979 border conflict with Vietnam.

Mr. Wei, who is now 43 years old, was being held at a labor camp near Tangshang
in northeast China.

The Justice Ministry official said she was not sure of his present whereabouts
but that she believed he had gone home.

His home was surrounded by security forces today, but there was no sign of Mr.
Wei.

In 1992, Chinese authorities responding to reports that Mr. Wei had been
tortured and was ill and losing his teeth, released a photograph of him and five
other prominent dissidents.  That did little to undermine the steady pressure
from the West calling for his release.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Takes 2d Step to Ease Ban on Trade With Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


In its second easing of the economic embargo against Vietnam in the last two
months, the Clinton Administration said today that American companies could bid
for construction and development projects there that were financed by the World
Bank and other international lending institutions.

The Administration cited Hanoi's cooperation in helping to determine the fate of
the more than 2,200 American servicemen who never came home from the war in
Southeast Asia.

But in announcing the partial lifting of the embargo, the White House press
secretary, Dee Dee Myers, said the bulk of the trade sanctions would be
maintained, "to make clear to the Vietnamese that more needs to be done" in
accounting for Americans still missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

President Clinton also renewed his authority to maintain sanctions against
Vietnam, Cuba, North Korea and several other countries under the Trading With
the Enemy Act. If Mr. Clinton had declined to act, all of those sanctions would
have lapsed on Tuesday.

On July 2, the Administration announced that it would not try to block a number
of countries, including Japan, France and Australia, that wanted to pay off
Vietnam's $140 million foreign debt. Once that debt was cleared, Hanoi would be
eligible for loans from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. Officials
at the World Bank have been putting together plans for $500 million to $800
million in new projects in Vietnam over five years.

Experts on the subject say the projects include dams and irrigation systems,
roads and power plants. American engineering and construction companies would
now be allowed to bid on these projects.

"I think it's a positive step," said Virginia Foote, director of the United
States-Vietnam Trade Council, a group that hopes to foster economic links
between the two countries. "I hope it's a continuation of steps toward full
economic normalization."

American energy companies seeking to exploit what some think are lucrative oil
fields in the South China Sea and United States aircraft makers seeking
contracts with Hanoi for commercial jets will gain little from today's
announcement.

"I'm certainly disappointed that they did not lift the sanctions overall," Ms.
Foote said. "But this is a positive step, small as it is."

In July, when the Administration said it would no longer stand in the way of
lending by international development banks, some experts said that today's
decision was inevitable. Since the United States provides about 19 percent of
the funds for institutions like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank,
keeping the embargo completely in force would have meant that American taxpayers
would have supported development projects in Vietnam on which American
businesses would not have been able to compete.

Officials of groups representing relatives of many of those listed as
unaccounted for condemned today's action, saying the information given American
investigators by Hanoi was inadequate.

"The Vietnamese are stiffing us, and the bureaucracy's assessment of their
cooperation is nothing more than a scam," said Ann Griffths, executive director
of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in
Southeast Asia.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

China Says Dissident Is Freed, but Family Waits

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 14


Friends, family and neighbors of Wei Jingsheng gathered today under the ginko
trees outside his parents' tiny apartment here, waiting for China's most famous
political dissident after the Government announced that he had been released
from prison.

But he never appeared, and the hours passed with increasing speculation that
China's Sakharov might not be truly free.

The Government said Mr. Wei, 43, had been released today, six months before the
end of his 15-year prison sentence. But a brief mention of the release on the
evening news and a short videotape of Mr. Wei leaving a luncheon given by prison
authorities were the only evidence of a change in the status of a man imprisoned
for "counterrevolutionary acts" that included draping his hand-scrawled posters
along a stretch of the so-called Democracy Wall to help ignite the short-lived
democracy movement of 1978-79.

Family Still Waiting

Wei Ling, 42, Mr. Wei's younger sister, said late tonight as she left her
parents' home that no one in the family has yet heard from Mr. Wei, even though
he should have arrived in Beijing from his prison 100 miles east of the capital
by dinnertime tonight. Mr. Wei's younger brother, Wei Xiaotao, 40, said that "we
have been told nothing" about when Mr. Wei will be home.

So the two most important questions about Wei Jingsheng could not be answered:
Has he really been released? And if so, how can China's rigidly antidemocratic
leaders afford once again to loose the power of free ideas that Mr. Wei
represents?

Mr. Wei is as powerful a pro-democracy symbol in China as Andrei D. Sakharov was
in the Soviet Union. But when Mikhail S. Gorbachev brought Dr. Sakharov back
from exile, it was to exploit his power and ideas in the quest to break the old
guard of the Communist system. In China, where the old guard still reigns, as
intolerant as ever of any notion of political reform, the emergence of Mr. Wei
seems a wholly unpredictable event.

"Gorbachev had already accepted the principles of human rights when he brought
Sakharov back," said Fang Lizhi, the Chinese astrophysicist who helped lead the
1989 democracy movement, which was suppressed by troops after students
demonstrated in Tiananmen Square.

"But now in China, these leaders will never accept the principles of human
rights and democracy," Mr. Fang said by telephone today from Arizona, where he
has settled after his expulsion from China. "They just want to use Wei in a
trade to get the Olympics."

Olympics Called a Factor

Human rights organizations hailed the official report of Mr. Wei's release but
accused the Chinese authorities of cynicism for acting little more than a week
before the International Olympic Committee meets in Monaco to decide on
Beijing's application to play host to the 2000 Olympic Games, a goal that China
has pursued with as much vigor as any other foreign policy initiative in recent
years.

"They've waited 14 1/2 years to release Wei," said Robin Munro, the senior Asia
representative of the New York-based Human Rights Watch and Asia Watch. "To wait
so long and then to release him at this eleventh hour, it is just so obvious
what they are trying to do."

Mr. Munro, speaking by telephone from Hong Kong, said, "The fact is that we
still have thousands of political and religious prisoners in China," perhaps
4,000 or more.

"We have a whole new generation of Wei Jingshengs in prison," he said. "Take
Chen Lantao, the marine biologist from Shandong Province who merely made a
speech on June 8, 1989," condemning the military assault on the pro-democracy
students at Tiananmen Square four days earlier.

"He got an 18-year prison sentence," Mr. Munro said, "and right now is sitting
there in a forced labor camp.

"And then there is Tang Yuanjuan, a worker from No. 1 car factory in Changqun in
the northeast who merely formed a workers' discussion club before the June 1989
demonstrations and then organized a memorial ceremony for the students who were
killed. He got 20 years."

Former Beijing Zoo Electrician

Though Mr. Wei, a former electrician at the Beijing Zoo, became the most famous
political prisoner in China, many of his contemporaries from the Democracy Wall
period, like Ren Wanding, are still in prison. Mr. Ren served four years for his
Democracy Wall attacks on Communism and is now serving a seven-year sentence for
inciting the students in Tiananmen Square in 1989.

Then there are Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, who also were among the early
democracy advocates in the 1970's. After the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989
they received especially harsh sentences, 13 years each, for stirring up the
students.

Assuming Mr. Wei has entered the capital still under escort of security
authorities, he will have by now seen a city buried in banners, bunting and
flowers all signifying the enthusiasm of Chinese leaders for the Olympic bid.

Knowing as Mr. Wei does that thousands of political prisoners remain behind
bars, human rights officials said they found it hard to believe that he would
allow his release to be used in furtherance of a disingenuous goal.

Mr. Munro, of Asia Watch, said: "Our information is that he is still pretty
feisty. He is insisting that his previous views are correct, so I wonder what
the Chinese authorities have in mind. Perhaps they will closet him away until
the Olympic decision is over, so that he does not spoil their bid by saying
something wrong."

Mr. Wei's sister, who has frequently visited her brother at his prison cell in
Tangshan, affectionately described her brother today as one of the most stubborn
men in history, saying he had clung tenaciously to his views through the long
years of solitary confinement, through the deterioration in his health and the
loss of teeth.

15-Year Prison Sentence

Mr. Wei was jailed in March 1979 and later sentenced to 15 years for
counterrevolutionary activities, which included passing state secrets about
China's 1979 border clash with Vietnam to a French journalist. At his trial, Mr.
Wei defended his conversation with the journalist, saying that it had not gone
beyond what Mr. Wei had learned from China's state-run television, and that in
any case, as an electrician he had no access to state secrets.

The Communist Party's real complaint against him, Mr. Wei suggested, was that he
had criticized China's senior leaders for being undemocratic.

In one of his last essays as a free man, Mr. Wei wrote, "If Deng Xiaoping does
not care for the people's plight and for the return of basic rights, if he
condemns the spontaneous democratic movement as an opportunity to make trouble,
it means he does not want democracy.

"What can democracy mean without freedom of speech, freedom to criticize? Just
explain to us what the difference is between that sort of democracy and Mao's
despotism."

By carrying his criticism personally to the doorstep of Mr. Deng, China's senior
leader, and to the memory of Mao Zedong, the country's Communist founder, Mr.
Wei crossed the line of propriety that is breached only at great risk, and he
seems to have engendered a personal animus in Mr. Deng that may account in part
for his prison sentence's running nearly to full term.

In a speech by Mr. Deng that was delivered to the Communist Party leadership in
secret in 1987 and later made public, the senior leader criticized Mr. Wei by
name and said his brand of evangelism threatened China's unity and therefore its
security.

But tonight, Mr. Wei's neighbors and friends did not seem threatened by his
return as they mulled and chattered under the ginko trees in the quiet courtyard
outside his family apartment. Among them was an old woman who puttered through
the throng, explaining something about Mr. Wei that most Chinese already know:
"He was a naughty little boy."


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: China's eagerness to be the host of the 2000 Olympic Games has
been linked to a flurry of recent moves that observers believe are designed to
stir favor. Prime Minister Li Peng was at a ceremony yesterday opening a new
11.6-mile six-lane highway between Beijing's airport and the city; The
Government announced it had released Wei Jingsheng, the country's most famous
dissident, six months before the end of his prison sentence. He appeared
yesterday in court in Tangshan. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Disappointed by U.S. Embargo Action

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 375 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 14


The Vietnamese Government expressed disappointment today over President
Clinton's decision to loosen rather than lift the 18-year-old economic embargo
against Vietnam.

Mr. Clinton relaxed sanctions Monday to allow American companies to bid on
Vietnamese projects financed by international lenders like the World Bank. He
did not specify the size or type of projects companies would be able to compete
for.

The Presidential spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said the overall embargo was being
maintained "to make clear to the Vietnamese that more needs to be done" to
settle the issue of missing American servicemen in Vietnam.

Ho The Lan, spokeswoman for Vietnam's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, welcomed the
partial lifting of the sanctions.

"However, it is regrettable that the U.S.A. still continues the embargo policy
against Vietnam that runs counter to the development trends in the region and
the world," she said in a statement.

The embargo was imposed in 1975, after Communist North Vietnam defeated South
Vietnam and unified the country.

While the statement described the embargo as a "violation" of Vietnam's right to
develop, it said American policy does not hinder Vietnam's widening
international relations or its strategy for economic development.

"It only ties up the American business circle, depriving them of a chance for
equal competition in Vietnam," the statement said.

Greig Craft, an American businessman who consults in Vietnam for Motorola and
Occidental Petroleum, said Mr. Clinton's decision would mean the loss of
millions of dollars in business for American companies.

But James Rockwell, a Hanoi-based consultant for Chrysler Corporation and other
American companies, said the gesture was meaningful. "American companies can
genuinely set up operations," he said.

Vietnamese officials had been hoping for an end to the embargo, given what they
say has been their full cooperation in helping to resolve the cases of 2,248
missing American servicemen.

Miss Lan's statement said Vietnam would continue to help resolve the issue of
missing Americans. And the commander of the American office on the missing in
Hanoi, Lieut. Col. John Cray of the Army, commended the Vietnamese for their
recent assistance.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words



International A3-13

ISRAEL AND U.S. SEEK SYRIA'S HELP
Israel and the U.S. called on President Hafez el-Assad to silence Palestinian
radicals in Damascus whom the Syrian Government is allowing to attack the peace
accord between Israel and the P.L.O.  A1

RISING INTRIGUE IN DAMASCUS
Damascus has become a cauldron of intrigue where the question of the moment is:
what can or should be done to sabotage the accord?  A10



Iran's President denounced the accords and said they would fail.  A10

Morocco's king has a dilemma: how close should he get to Israel?  A11

SOUTH AFRICAN ROYAL FAMILY?
Few countries take beauty pageants quite as seriously as South Africa. Critics
attribute the obsession to te sexual hypocrisy, but participants say South
Africans dote on beauty queens because they have no royal family and no
Hollywood.  A1

HEAVY FIGHTING IN BOSNIA
Bosnian Government forces advanced in heavy fighting against Croatian units
along a new front about 20 miles northwest of the Mostar, Sarajevo radio
reported.  A3

FRENCH FARMERS STAGE PROTEST
Farmers disrupted traffic in and around Paris today as a warning of what may lie
ahead if France does not stand firm in its opposition to an agreement to reduce
subsidies to European agriculture.  A3

RUSSIAN JET HIJACKED TO NORWAY
Hijackers armed with grenades and other explosives forced a Russian jetliner
with 52 people aboard to land in Norway. The police said the air pirates,
believed to be Iranians, gave themselves up and asked for asylum.  A5

EGYPT TO EXECUTE TWO MILITANTS
An Egyptian military court sentenced two of eight Muslim militants to hang for
trying to assassinate an army general.  A12

Two Italian peacekeepers were shot dead in Somalia.  A8

Rome Journal: Efforts to control the Tiber upset the city's heart.  A4

National A14-21, B9

A FUGITIVE SURRENDERS
Twenty-three years after going underground, Katherine Ann Power surrendered to
the police for her role in a fatal bank robbery. She was one of the last of a
generation of fugitive student revolutionaries opposed to the Vietnam War.  A1

SPLIT ON TRADE PACT
A dispute over the trade pact with Mexico and Canada has split the American
environmental movement.  A1

UNIONS FIGHT THE ACCORD
Organized labor has emerged as a force both in the drive to stop the trade
agreement and the campaign to enact President Clinton's health care plan.  A21

The pact's foes resumed their attacks, Ross Perot in front.  A20

CRITICISM OF HEALTH PLAN
Congressional Republicans and the American Medical Association complained that
President Clinton's health proposals relied far too much on Government
regulation to control costs.  A21

KILLING GALVANIZES FLORIDA
As the police searched for the killers of a British tourist, Florida officials
pledged to make the state's highways safer and limit damage to its tourism
industry.  A14

NAVY CHEATING INQUIRY
In what is emerging as one of the largest cheating scandals ever at the Naval
Academy, investigators suspect that at least 125 midshipmen had advance
knowledge about a final exam.  A14

NEW LOOK AT THE TITANIC
The disastrous loss of the Titanic was caused not so much by an iceberg as by
structural weaknesses in the ship's steel plates, a maritime study says.  A14

SENTENCE TO BE REVIEWED
A Georgia panel said it would review the three-year prison sentence imposed on a
youth for stealing ice cream.  A15

TOO MUCH ULTRASOUND?
The routine use of ultrasound screening does not improve the outcome of
pregnancies for low-risk women, says a study that suggests that the procedure
should be used more selectively.  A17

ABORTION BILL FALTERS
Legislation to prohibit most state restrictions on abortion appears to be dead
for at least this year and perhaps longer, with supporters divided over how
sweeping the bill should be.  A18

NO PUNISHMENT AT PENN
University of Pennsylvania officials dropped disciplinary proceedings against
nine students who confiscated all the copies of a student newspaper to protest a
conservative column.  B9

Infant mortality reached a record low last year, a survey said.  A16

A former judge and a prosecutor will run for mayor of Detroit.  A19

Metro Digest B1

AFTER PRIMARY, A NEW CAMPAIGN
Mayor Dinkins yesterday used the moment after his easy renomination to wrap
himself in the support of top Democratic politicians at a pep rally, even as his
Republican-Liberal rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, pulled hard for the crossover
Democratic voters.  A1

INVESTIGATION FAULTS HOLTZMAN
A city investigation has found that Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman was "grossly
negligent" because she took a $450,000 campaign loan from a bank and then
approved the bank's selection as an underwriter of New York City bonds.  A1

HOPING FOR PEACE AT HOLIDAY TIME
Across New York and the country, American Jews began their 10-day observance of
the High Holy Days with mixed emotions after a week in which Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement that raised the
possibility of peace in the Middle East.  A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-10

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Nureyev estate sale is postponed
a year.  C11

A classic "Streetcar" is re-released.  C12

Stolen Vermeer and Goya works recovered.  C11

Music: Bette Midler at Radio City.  C11

A radical sound turns chic.  C15

Dance: Twyla Tharp at City Center.  C11

Movement Research opens annual series.  C15

Books: Two views of rape.  C15

Television: "Firing Line," on the religious right.  C16

Sports B11-17

Baseball: Yankees lose, 15-5.  B11

How the Giants folded.  B11

Obituaries B10

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Holtzman's unbelievable defense.

A health plan headed for failure.

Mr. Cisneros marches on Vidor.

Letters

William Safire: Fuzzy, was he?

Caleb Carr: The humanitarian illusion.

Leon M. Lederman: Science and the bottom line.

Bridge C14

Chronicle B7

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Statement of Vietnam War-Era Fugitive

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


Following is the text of the statement by Katherine Ann Power, who surrendered
to the Boston police yesterday, 23 years after a group of war protesters robbed
a bank and killed a Boston police officer:

I am surrendering to authorities today to answer charges that arise from a
series of acts 23 years ago. I am here to plead guilty to these charges, and I
am prepared to accept whatever consequences the legal system will impose.

Those who know me now, and those who reflect on my two decades of life as an
apparently exemplary citizen will wonder how someone such as myself could commit
such outrageously illegal acts. The answer lies in the deep and violent crisis
that the Vietnam War created in our land. At that time, the law was being broken
everywhere: at the very top, where an intransigent President defied
international law as well as the express intentions of Congress; in Government
services, where Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers in the hope that
citizen scrutiny could hasten an end to the war; among the clergy, where priests
and nuns destroyed draft records; in neighborhoods, where young men defied the
draft.

The illegal acts that I committed arose, not from any desire for personal gain,
but from a deep philosophical and spiritual commitment that if a wrong exists,
one must take active steps to stop it, regardless of the consequences to oneself
in comfort or security. Although at the time those actions seemed the correct
course, they were in fact naive and unthinking.

My intention was never to damage any human life by my acts, and there is no
accusation that I was directly responsible for the death of Walter Schroeder.
His death was shocking to me, and I have had to examine my conscience and accept
any responsibility I have for events that led to it.

In response, I have lived my life as something of a penitent, ever seeking to
grow as a person of peace. I have much company on this path, including many
Vietnam veterans who have reflected on their actions in the war and on the lives
that were damaged as a result.

Leaving my son, my husband, and my friends to enter prison is not easy. But I
know that I must answer this accusation from the past, in order to live with
full authenticity in the present. A lifelong, untreated condition of endogenous
clinical depression has prevented my taking this step before. Experiencing life
without that distorting lens, I am now learning to live with openness and truth,
rather than shame and hiddenness.

I have deeply regretted the repeated separations caused by my status as
fugitive. I invite past friends and associates to forgive my absence, and to
renew their acquaintance with me. I will accept with grace the ordeal ahead, and
I will return to my community prepared to continue a life of connection,
service, and joy.


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Measuring the Lines Between Religion and Politics

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words


The give-and-get format brings out high spirits and low blows in tomorrow
night's "Firing Line" debate about the religious right.

Taking their stand in behalf of the resolution "We need not fear the religious
right" are William F. Buckley Jr., the personification of "Firing Line"; Pat
Robertson, the televangelist and founder of the Christian Coalition, who was a
candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1988; Representative
Henry Hyde, the conservative Illinois Republican, and Rabbi Jacob Neusner, a
professor of religious studies at the University of South Florida, who distances
himself somewhat from his allies by coming out for separation of church and
state, though not of religion and politics.

Mixing it up with them are Ira Glasser, the executive director of the American
Civil Liberties Union; Barry Lynn, an ordained minister who is executive
director of Americans United for Separation of Church and State and a host of
the radio show "Battleline"; Cornel West, a professor of religion and the
director of Afro-American studies at Princeton University, and Harriet Woods,
the president of the National Women's Political Caucus.

Their case, most baldly put by Mr. Glasser and Mr. Lynn, is that the Christian
right, as represented by Mr. Robertson, is out to set up a theocracy in the
United States. Mr. Robertson counters that the American Civil Liberties Union is
shoving the nation into anarchy. Both sides have polite partisans in the
audience at the University of South Carolina.

It soon becomes evident that the somewhat remote issue of the meaning of the
First Amendment is less on the minds, or at least the tongues, of the debaters
than are current political battles. Mr. Buckley starts off by laying all the
ills of the day (violent crime, illegitimate births, divorce, a drop in
Scholastic Aptitude Test scores, you name it) to "secularist fanatics." Mr. West
says that Mr. Robertson's religious outlook is tied to capitalism, and Ms. Woods
puts it down for the putting down of women.

The tone is one of nasty affability. As ever, the zest of a debate lies in the
point-scoring and opponent-goring. Pressed by Mr. Lynn to explain how his
promise that if he were President he would appoint only Christians and Jews to
public office squares with Article Six of the Constitution, the best Mr.
Robertson can come up with is, "Would you like to have Muammar el-Qaddafi as
Secretary of Defense?" He later clarifies his position: "I am talking about that
with which a person is congenial." (In a similar exchange with Mr. Glasser and
Mr. West, Mr. Buckley makes light of their concern, with cracks about
Zoroastrians and Davidians.)

When Mr. Neusner and Mr. Hyde ask Mr. West whether he objected when the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. framed his opposition to the war in Vietnam on Christian
grounds or when the Rev. Jesse Jackson used churches in his 1988 campaign for
the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr. West concedes that his real
objection to Mr. Robertson's proselytizing is that he is wrong about the
Christian message.

Mr. West gets back at Mr. Neusner by asking what it feels like to be part of a
movement that has a history of being "so viciously anti-Semitic." The rabbi
answers, "We have our kooks; you have your kooks."

When Ms. Woods directs Mr. Hyde's attention to the small number of women in
Congress, he wins boos from the audience for wisecracking that "there are some
who say there are so many women now on the floor of Congress, it looks like a
mall." Under the goading of Ms. Woods, he squirms: "Now I don't say that. I
disavow that. I disavow that completely. I wouldn't say that. There are some, I
said, who hold that, not I. Not I." The Congressman doth protest too much,
methinks.

Surprises are few, but people on the mailing list of the American Civil
Liberties Union may be gratified to hear Mr. Glasser concede that his
organization's panicky fund-raising letters, with their constant evocations of
the specter of a deadly threat to civil liberties, "may be hyperbolic."

A word, finally, for the moderator, Michael Kinsley, who oils the proceedings
with droll asides. At one point, Mr. Buckley, doing a little dance to avoid a
straight answer to Mr. Glasser's question about the constitutionality of a law
that prohibits oral sex between married, heterosexual adults, vapors on:
"Certain rights, I think, are legitimately decocted from an understanding of
what the Constitution probably would have said in certain circumstances."

Mr. Kinsley uses his gavel and ends the encounter with the words, "I have to
decoct both of you here."

'Nightline'
'Streetwise in Seattle'
ABC, 11:35 P.M.

Taking a break from breaking stories, "Nightline" devotes itself tonight and
tomorrow night to a look into the life, or existence, of a 24-year-old woman who
went onto the streets at the age of 13. Erin Blackwell first attracted the
attention of a photojournalist for Life magazine in 1983, and she and her
husband, a movie director, stayed in touch with the girl.

It's a story of a drunken mother, prostitution, drugs and fatherless children.
The sight of Ms. Blackwell, still fresh-faced except for the occasional street
snarl, telling Ted Koppel of her dreams of breaking out of the self-destroying
cycle ends the report on a desperately sad note.

'20/20'

ABC, 10 P.M. tomorrow

Most of this edition of "20/20" is given to the first television interview with
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, since he ran into
trouble in November 1992 for harassing a former lover. Barbara Walters lays out
the juicy details and does the interviewing. She exudes sympathy, as Judge
Wachtler, who has just been sentenced to 15 months in prison, blames his
unjudicial behavior on mental depression and too many prescription drugs. This
may be the most unstartling scoop of the week.

Firing Line Debate
Resolved: We Need Not Fear the Religious Right
PBS, tomorrow night at 9 (Channel 13 in New York)

Produced and directed by Warren Steibel in association with South Carolina ETV;
Michael Kinsley of The New Republic magazine, moderator

With: Pat Robertson, the religious broadcaster; Rabbi Jacob Neusner, a professor
of religious studies at the University of South Florida, Representative Henry
Hyde, Republican of Illinois, and William F. Buckley Jr., the columnist and
Firing Line host, for the resolution. Cornell West, a professor of religion and
African-American studies at Princeton; Barry Lynn, the executive director of
Americans United for Separation of Church and State; Harriet Woods, the
president of the National Women's Political Caucus, and Ira Glasser, the
executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, opposed.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

60's Radical, Linked to a Killing, Surrenders After Hiding 23 Years

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1632 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 15


Twenty-three years after going underground as an anti-war radical wanted for
bank robbery and the murder of a Boston police officer, Katherine Ann Power
surrendered to the police here today.

One of the last of a generation of fugitive student revolutionaries opposed to
the Vietnam War, Ms. Power, 44, pleaded guilty in Superior Court today to
charges of manslaughter and armed robbery dating back to 1970, when she was a
senior at Brandeis University.

She is to be sentenced on the charge, which was reduced from murder after 18
months of negotiations, on Oct. 6 and could receive a term of life in prison,
although her lawyer said she expected her to be sentenced to five years.

In surrendering, she shed the identity of Alice L. Metzinger, small-town Oregon
wife, mother, successful restaurateur, cooking teacher and taxpayer. She said
she was "learning to live with openness and truth, rather than shame and
hiddenness."

Accompanied by Parents

Ms. Power was accompanied to court by her husband, Ron Duncan, an accountant,
and her elderly parents, who said neither they nor their six other children had
seen or heard from her in 23 years.

Every Jan. 25th for 23 years Marjorie and Winfield Power had celebrated their
daughter's birthday. "We always made a cake and wrote 'Happy Birthday, Kathy' on
it," said Mrs. Power, who is 71. "We always had that hope that we would see her
again."

Her daughter became Alice Metzinger in 1977, eventually creating a vague resume
that was true as far as it went, saying for example that she had attended
college for three years but not saying which college. It was only a month ago
that Ms. Power told her son, Jaime, 14, who she really was. And it was only
three days ago that she told the friends from her years in Oregon at a goodbye
party she gave for herself.

Her husband, whom she married a year ago after a 13-year relationship, had
apparently known for some time. A slight man with a graying ponytail, Mr. Duncan
looked crushed in court today. "This building isn't big enough to contain my
grief," he told The Associated Press.

In northwest Oregon, his wife was the co-proprietor of M's Tea and Coffee House
in Corvallis. But there was always something mysterious about her. "She never
disclosed anything about her personal life," said the chef at M's, Lynette
Adkins.

Eighteen months ago, suffering from depression, Ms. Power began seeing a
therapist. She decided that she could not go on with her secret life. She
consulted a lawyer in Oregon, Steven Black, who had been a pilot in Vietnam, and
then one in Boston, Rikki Klieman, who had been a student radical at
Northwestern University. The two began negotiating Ms. Power's surrender with
the district attorney's office.

"She could not have intimate relations with people," Ms. Klieman said. "There
were all sorts of questions about how she would raise her son. Who were his
grandparents? Who was she? The only way to recreate her life was to own up to
who she was and face up to the charges."

On Sept. 23, 1970, Ms. Power and four associates, armed with handguns, a shotgun
and a submachine gun, robbed $26,000 from the State Street Bank and Trust
Company in Brighton. The first police officer to arrive at the bank, Walter A.
Schroeder, was fatally shot in the back by William Gilday Jr., who is serving a
life sentence in prison. Ms. Power drove the getaway car.

'It Still Hurts'

Officer Schroeder, a World War II veteran, left a wife, Marie, and nine
children. In a pained voice, his sister-in-law, Emmie Schroeder, said today, "It
still hurts."

In a statement released by Ms. Klieman today, Ms. Power acknowledged that she
had committed "outrageously illegal acts" but attributed them to the Vietnam
War. "At that time the law was being broken everywhere," she said.

In the statement, Ms. Power said of her actions, "Although at the time those
actions seemed the correct course, they were in fact naive and unthinking."

She expressed deep regret for the death of Officer Schroeder, saying, "His death
was shocking to me, and I have had to examine my conscience and accept any
responsibility I have for events that led to it."

Money for Radical Action

Mr. Black, her Oregon lawyer, said Ms. Power and her associates had planned to
use the money to buy explosives to melt down the wheels of trains that carried
military weapons and to arm the Black Panthers.

The bank robbery came in a year when the anti-war movement had splintered, with
some groups going underground and turning to violence. That March, three members
of the Weathermen, a radical group, blew themselves up in the Greenwich Village
town house where they were trying to build bombs.

Then the United States invaded Cambodia. Four days later in early May, four Kent
State University students were shot to death by the National Guard during a
protest of the invasion. The next day Kathy Power was one of thousands of
students who walked out of classes in protest.

A national committee to coordinate student strikes was set up at Brandeis and it
included Ms. Power, Susan Saxe and a state prison inmate on a college furlough
program, Stanley Bond. All three took part in the bank robbery.

"There was a tremendous sense of betrayal that the war which seemed to be ending
was re-escalating," said Jacob Cohen, the chairman of the American studies
department at Brandeis, who teaches a course on the 60's, and was teaching there
at the time.

'Suicidal and Hysterical'

"There was an atmosphere of terrorism," Professor Cohen said. "I'm not saying
that Kathy Power was a terrorist. But there was a broader cultural context of
revolutionary violence."

About the strike committee, he said: "They were indeed protesting the war in
Vietnam and doing what other idealistic young people were doing. But they were
also suicidal and hysterical."

Ms. Klieman, Ms. Power's Boston lawyer, said her client, an honors student
majoring in sociology at Brandeis, had been sheltered by her large family in
Denver, then had become romantically involved with Mr. Bond. Professor Cohen
said that many young women were mesmerized by the furloughed convict.

"He was thrilling, like Othello to Desdemona," he said. "From their point of
view, and I would think from Kathy's point of view, there was something exciting
and romantic and even revolutionary about a criminal."

In 1972, awaiting trial for the murder of Officer Schroeder, Stanley Bond was
killed in prison when a bomb he was making detonated.

Susan Saxe, who went underground, living series of women's communes with Ms.
Power, was captured in Philadelphia in 1975. She served eight years in prison
for manslaughter and armed robbery. The fifth accomplice, Robert J. Valeri, who
was convicted of manslaughter and robbery, has been released from prison.

Mr. Gilday, a former minor league baseball pitcher from Amesbury, Mass., was 41
at the time of the robbery. He had served seven years in prison for armed
robbery. After getting out, he enrolled at Northeastern University but had yet
to take a class when he killed Mr. Schroeder.

For 14 years, Ms. Power was on the F.B.I.'s most-wanted list. The agency took
her off the list in 1984, saying there were no more leads in the case. By then,
Ms. Power was establishing a life as Alice Metzinger, in northwest Oregon. She
was raising her son and was teaching cooking and nutrition at Linn-Benton
Community College, in Albany, where the dean of college service, Brian Brown,
described Ms. Power today as an excellent teacher.

Eighteen months ago, Ms. Power and Marilyn Schwader opened M's Tea and Coffee
House in Corvallis, 90 miles south of Portland. "She could cook anything," Ms.
Schwader said today.

On Sunday, the day before she flew to Boston, Ms. Power threw a goodbye party
for Alice Metzinger with a potluck dinner with a New Age bent. Ms. Schwader was
one of 40 guests. There was grilled tuna, polenta with tomato and zucchini
sauce, focaccia and apple crumb cake.

Alice's revelation, when it came, was understated, to say the least. "I have
something to say," she announced to her friends. All conversation stopped, Ms.
Schwader said. "She said, 'I'm leaving, and I wanted to let you know why,' " Ms.
Schwader said. " 'I have a small administrative matter to take care of.' "

Ms. Schwader said people were shocked, and then concerned. "Everyone was asking,
'What can we do to help?' "

Ms. Power asked for mementoes to remember her friends by. Some wrote notes.
Others gave her New Age stones.

The next day Ms. Power and her husband boarded a plane for Boston. Her parents
flew in from Grand Junction, Colo. At a hotel in Cambridge on Tuesday night they
had an emotional reunion with the daughter they had not seen in 23 years. They
brought photo albums to show her the nieces and nephews she had never met. They
in turn learned about Jaime, the grandson they had never known about. "I just
said, 'Oh, Thank God!" said Mrs. Power. "We hugged for a long, long time."

In court today, Mr. Power, 75, seemed near tears. "I'm proud of her for what
she's done in turning herself in," he said. "Would a parent ever forsake his
child? I have never heard of one."

Mrs. Power said: "She has suffered greatly over the years. She's been in prison
all her life." Now, she said, her daughter had grown up. "She is ready to face
things and get on with her life."

Ms. Klieman said her client, who is being held in jail without bail, was on
medication for depression. Ms. Power also pleaded not guilty today to Federal
charges of robbing a National Guard armory in Newburyport, Mass., but she is
expected to change that plea. Ms. Klieman said she hoped her client could serve
any Federal sentence in a prison near home, where her husband and son could
visit.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Katherine Ann Power in court yesterday in Boston to face
charges in a 1970 bank robbery. Below, a detail of a police wanted poster. (pg.
A1); At the court appearance yesterday of Katherine Ann Power, 23 years after
she went underground, the husband and family of the antiwar radical were in
Boston to hear her guilty plea. From left were her husband, Ron Duncan, her
parents, Winfield and Marjorie Power, and her sister, Claudia Jansen. (pg. B9)
(Associated Press)

Chart: "Campus Radicals: Where Are They Now?"

In 1970, Katherine Ann Power was one of nine campus radicals on the F.B.I.'s
Most Wanted List. Here are the other eight:

DWIGHT ALAN ARMSTRON, 41, served three years inprison for 1970 bombing of Army
Math Research Center at the University of Wisconsin, in which a researcher was
killed and four people were injured. Now works as a cab driver in Madison, Wis.

KARLETON LEWIS ARMSTRON, 45, served time in prison for Math Center bombing. In
1989, at a gathering of former college radicals, Mr. Armstrong apologized to the
family of the researcher killed in the bombing. Now runs a fruit juice business
in Madison.

CAMERON DAVID BISHOP, 50, arrested in March 1975 for the 1969 bombing of four
power transmissiontowers in Colorado. A conviction in the case was overturned in
May 1977. In 1981 he had a farm in Dixmont, Me.

H. RAP BROWN, 49, placed on Most Wanted List in 1970 for failing to appear at
his trial for "inciting to riot and arson" in a 1967 speech. Later served three
years in prison for an unrelated armed robbery. Now known as Jamil Abdullah
Al-Amin, he is a Muslim spiritual leader.

LEO FREDERICK BURT, 45, the only person on the original lisst who is still at
large. Wanted in the Math Center bombin. Reported variously in Canada, South
American, and California.

DAVID SYLVAN FINE, 41, apprehended in 1976 and served three years in a Federal
prison for Army Math Center bombin. Mr. Fine later received a law degree from
the University of Oregon, but was denied admittance to the Oregon bar in 1985
because of his criminal record. Last reported to be a legal assistant in
Portland, Ore.

BERNARDINE DOHRN, 51, a former leader of the Weather Underground. Surrendered to
authorities in 1980, 10 years after becoming a fugitive to avoid Federal and
local riot charges in connection with anti-war demonstrations in 1969. Later
received a law degree from the University of Chicago and passed the New York bar
exam, but was denied admittance to the New York bar because of her record. Now
working as a legal assistant in Chicago, where she lives with her husband,
William Ayers, also a former member of Weather Underground.

SUSAN SAXE, 44, arrested in 1975, served eight years in prison for her role in
the same 1970 bank robbery in Boston that Ms. Power participated in. Before her
parole in 1982, she ran a successful computer company from jail. Last reported
to be living in Philadelphia. (pg. B9)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Conscience Haunted by a Radical's Crime

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1807 words

DATELINE: CORVALLIS, Ore., Sept. 16


They came together 16 months ago, a small-town Oregon therapist and a fugitive
from a bank robbery and slaying two decades earlier.

The therapist, Linda Carroll, said she had never seen a psyche so battered as
that of the fugitive, Katherine Ann Power. It was impossible for her to believe
that this bespectacled cook with the terrific polenta recipe, a person who would
cry at any mention of family, had spent 14 years as one of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's 10 most wanted fugitives.

Ms. Power, who pleaded guilty Wednesday in Boston to charges of manslaughter and
armed robbery in 1970, told Ms. Carroll she was paralyzed by depression. Over
the next year and a half, she told her story: a Catholic girl from a family of
seven children, winner of a Betty Crocker Homemaker Award in high school, had
gone on to rob a bank to protest the Vietnam War.

The robbery resulted in the killing of a father of nine, a Boston police
officer, Walter Schroeder Sr.

And for the next 23 years, more than half of it in the settled security of the
central Willamette Valley, Ms. Power lived a lie.

In Oregon, she was Alice Metzinger, borrowing a name from an infant who died in
1949, the year Ms. Power was born. Alice Metzinger became a cooking instructor
at the local community college, a mom who made cookies for her son's sports
team, a jogger seen daily on the path along the Willamette River.

But her life was becoming unbearable because of her isolation from family and
her past, her relentless fear, and the truth of what she had done, Ms. Carroll
said.

So together, the therapist and the middle-age 1960's radical decided to bring
Ms. Power in from the cold, a process that developed in stages over the last
year. Ms. Power's marriage to Ron Duncan, a meat cutter and bookkeeper who had
been her boyfriend for 13 years, helped it along. So did her participation in a
mock trial involving Vietnam-era war crimes, in which she played the public
defender of a soldier who had confessed to killing innocents in Southeast Asia.

Slowly, starting with a few close friends, she began telling people who she
really was.

Finally, she was ready to turn herself in and reclaim her name and her past.
After a potluck party here on Sunday, at which she disclosed her secret before a
gathering of 40 friends, Ms. Power, one of the last Vietnam-era fugitives whose
cases remained unresolved, flew to Boston and was arraigned in court. She is
being held in Suffolk County Jail awaiting sentencing, which is scheduled for
Oct. 6.

'The Fog Lifted'

"My goal was never to turn her in," Ms. Carroll said in an interview today. "It
was to get her well. What happened with the law was secondary. She started to
see her life through the lens of this depression, and when that happened, the
fog lifted. She wanted to turn herself in."

Ms. Carroll said she was discussing details of private therapeutic sessions,
normally a breach of ethics, with Ms. Power's consent. Indeed, Ms. Power had
urged her to tell the story publicly, the therapist said.

In a statement issued Monday, Ms. Power said she had "a lifelong, untreated
condition of endogenous clinical depression." Ms. Carroll said Ms. Power was
taking an anti-depressant medication, trazodone hydrochoride, for her condition.

Therapist and patient agreed that Ms. Power's depression was not the reason she
became an urban terrorist, Ms. Carroll said.

The authorities in Massachusetts said Ms. Power drove the getaway car in the
1970 robbery of a Brighton bank, a crime that netted $27,000. Three male
accomplices and Ms. Power's roommate at Brandeis University, Susan E. Saxe, have
been caught, convicted and sentenced to prison. Ms. Power also faces Federal
charges from the theft of 400 pounds of ammunition from a National Guard armory
in Massachusetts.

Ms. Carroll, licensed as Linda Carroll-Barraud by the state of Oregon in 1990,
practices marriage and family therapy with the Northwest Counseling Clinic in
Lebanon, Ore. She has a master's degree from Oregon State Univeristy in
Corvallis.

The transformation from high school honors student to one of the nation's
most-wanted fugitives began at Brandeis, where Ms. Power was on a four-year
scholarship. In Denver, her home town, she was the 1967 valedictorian at
Marycrest High School, a Catholic institution that no longer exists. She wrote a
student column and even then was known as a cook with a future; her recipes
helped her win a homemaker award.

'All These Little Rich Girls'

The nuns at Marycrest gave Ms. Power a sense of duty, of wanting to save the
world and acting on that impulse, Ms. Carroll said.

"Then she goes off to Brandeis and there are all these little rich girls in
matching outfits and she doesn't belong," Ms. Carroll said, and Ms. Power
suffered debilitating bouts of depression, feeling worthless and suicidal for
most of her life.

"Her senior year at college she rooms with Susan Saxe," said Ms. Carroll. "They
are so appalled at what's going on in Vietnam that they want to do something.
They decide to rob a bank and give the money away. But they don't know anything
about robbing a bank."

According to court testimony, Ms. Power and Ms. Saxe hooked up with three
ex-convicts and committed a series of crimes, including the theft of ammunition.
One of the men, William Gilday, a former baseball player who acted as the
lookout at the robbery, was later convicted of shooting Officer Schroeder. He
still maintains he is innocent.

Ms. Saxe and Ms. Power went underground, staying in a series of women's
communes. Ms. Saxe was arrested in 1975 and served seven years in prison.

With her infant son, Jaime, Ms. Power arrived in Oregon in 1979 and, using the
Alice Metzinger alias, established a reputation as a cook.

Corvallis is a college town and like other parts of the state it has a time-warp
quality that 1960's-era hippies have found comfortable. In Eugene, 45 miles to
the south, Ms. Power opened the Napoli restaurant and taught cooking at
Linn-Benton Community College.

When she later sold her half of the Eugene restaurant, she gave the proceeds to
a charity that fights world hunger, Ms. Carroll said.

In 1985, she and Mr. Duncan bought a small frame house in nearby Lebanon for
$30,000. Neighbors remember her recipes. "We had barbecues and watched each
other's houses when either couple went away," said Darlene Lindgren, who lives
next to Ms. Power in Lebanon. "You couldn't have asked for a better neighbor. I
knew her as Alice, and to me Alice was a fine person."

Bouts of Suicidal Depression

But "Alice" was deeply depressed, to the point of considering suicide, friends
said.

In May 1992, she showed up at a night class on depression, taught by Ms.
Carroll. There were only four others in the class, and Ms. Carroll considered
canceling it until she talked to Ms. Power, who began to cry at the simplest
promptings of her feelings.

"She was so desperate to talk about herself but she couldn't," Ms. Carroll
recalled. "I don't think I've ever seen anyone suffering so much from acute
depression. She literally could not talk without crying."

Dr. Patrick J. McGrath, an associate professor of clinical psychiatry at the
Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, said endogenous clinical depression
was the most common form of the depression, affecting as many as 1 in 10 women
in the United States. Symptoms include loss of appetite, difficulty
concentrating, anxiety, loss of energy, suicidal thoughts, insomnia and loss of
interest in pleasurable activities.

The 1992 class lasted a month, and afterward Ms. Power began to see Ms. Carroll
as a patient. At first she told the therapist very little. Then as she began to
trust her, she revealed her past. More than anything, she wanted to see her
family, Ms. Carroll said.

"She loved her family -- this big Irish Catholic family with seven siblings. It
was like a tribe," Ms. Carroll said. "And she could not have any of that. Yet
she had a boy of her own and she wanted him to be connected to it."

Ms. Carroll put her patient in touch with a psychiatrist, who prescribed
trazodone hydrochloride.

Dr. McGrath said trazodone hydrochloride, sold under the brand name Desyrel,
causes slight drowsiness when taken daily at bedtime, and over time it gradually
elevates the patient's mood.

Ms. Carroll also introduced Ms. Power to Steven Black, a public defender and
Vietnam veteran. For more than a year, working through a series of
intermediaries and lawyers in other states, Mr. Black negotiated with
authorities in Boston. But it was never clear until this month that Ms. Power
would turn herself in.

Appalled at Her Own Actions

Slowly coming in out of the cold and coming to grips with what she had done was
part of her therapy. "She felt immense guilt and remorse," Ms. Carroll said.
"She was appalled that a policeman had died."

On the other end of the continent, members of Officer Schroeder's family said
they, too, were appalled. As long as Ms. Power remained at large, the case would
never be closed.

Less than a year ago, Mr. Black, a former Vietnam combat pilot who felt guilt
about his role in the war, staged a mock trial, after-hours in the county
courthouse. A jury of friends was empaneled with Mr. Black as the defendant and
Ms. Power as his lawyer.

"She laid the groundwork for him, arguing that he had been indoctrinated by the
military into taking people's lives," said Rod Terry, a Vietnam veteran who
acted as one of the mock jurors. "Personally, I found the whole thing to have
too much of an air of mockness about it."

But he said he felt, in retrospect, that although the trial had been staged to
help Mr. Black deal with his feelings of guilt, it had serendipitously helped
Ms. Power come to an understanding about her own activities during the Vietnam
era.

Ms. Carroll said that in the last few months, Ms. Power had realized she was
going to have to make one of two choices: turn herself in or plant herself
firmly and forever in Oregon as Alice Metzinger.

"The more she got well, the more she wanted to see her family," Ms. Carroll
said. "She wanted to dream about the future. She wanted to travel. She had put
off everything and now she wanted to get on with life. So she married the man
she wanted to spend her life with, she went to the mock trial, she began to
include her son in community events. But she always knew that at any time she
could be caught and it would be time to go."

Earlier this week, Ms. Power had a reunion with her family in Boston. On
Wednesday, she was led in shackles to court, where she pleaded guilty.

Ms. Carroll saw her patient on television on Wednesday night; she saw that she
was smiling. "I burst out crying," she said. "I was so proud of her. She had
walked away but she had walked away as a whole person."

NAME: Katherine Ann Power

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Katherine Ann Power, left, with Marilyn Schwader in a
restaurant in Corvallis, Ore., where Ms. Power worked as a cook and consultant.
She assumed the identity of Alice Metzinger, living in the area for more than
half of the 23 years she was a fugitive wanted for bank robbery and murder in
Boston.; Linda Carroll, the therapist who hepled Katherine Ann Power confront
the crimes of her past. (Photographs by The Corvallis Gazette-Times) (pg. A22)

Map of Oregon showing location of Corvallis. (pg. A22)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 956 words



International A3-11

MUSLIMS AND SERBS ALTER PLAN
The Muslim-led Government of Bosnia and Bosnian Serbs agreed to adjust a peace
plan that would partition the country, allowing referendums on whether the
republics will remain in the new union.  A1

It's unclear if the accord meets U.S. conditions for sending troops.  A8



HINDU RAGE AND INDIA'S MUSLIMS
A growing Hindu rage toward India's Muslim minority has been spreading among
middle-class Hindus, creating uncertainty about the future ability of adherents
of the two religions to get along.  A1

PRISON FOR 3 EX-EAST GERMANS
In Berlin, three former East German leaders were found guilty of inciting guards
to kill citizens who tried to flee. The three men, ranging from 66 to 73 years
of age, received terms of four and a half years to seven and a half years.  A3

YELTSIN TO RESTORE GAIDAR
President Yeltsin said he was bringing Yegor T. Gaidar back as First Deputy
Prime Minister in charge of all economic matters, after opponents forced his
ouster as Acting Prime Minister in December.  A3

AN 18-MONTH PLAN FOR SOMALIA
The chief United Nations official in Somalia set out an 18-month timetable for
the creation of a democratic government there.  A5

ANTI-MAFIA PRIEST IS SLAIN
A Roman Catholic priest who was an outspoken opponent of organized crime was
shot and killed in Palermo in what appears to have been a Mafia execution.  A9

U.S. TO SEEK AID FOR MIDEAST
President Clinton plans to propose to allies that the United States hold a
special conference for donor countries to pledge money for Middle East peace.
A10

Syria sharply criticized Israel for the accord with the P.L.O.  A10

The P.L.O. Fatah faction and Hamas agreed to avoid violence.  A10

Skeptics about Israel's course seem to outnumber supporters.  A10

Japan announced an economic stimulus package worth $57 billion.  A11

The Big Three want U.S. monitoring of imported Japanese vehicles.  D2

Zanzibar Journal: Democracy and economic change and ghosts.  A4

National A12-22

HEALTH CAMPAIGN COMMENCES
President Clinton invited citizens to the White House, then met small business
owners at a Washington hardware store, all for the purpose of selling his health
care plan.  A1

Hillary Clinton will testify on heath care before Congress.  A20

The small-business interests that battle the President.  A20

HYPERBOLIC TRADE DEBATE
Much of the debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement centers more on
politics and hyperbole than on economics.  A1

FOLLOWING A FUGITIVE'S PATH
Bit by bit over a year and a half, a small-town therapist heard the story of a
1960's radical who had lived in hiding for 23 years, and gradually, Katherine
Ann Power's long depression lifted.  A1

A COLLISION THAT ROCKED EARTH
A study says the space object that crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago
and may have wiped out the dinosaurs was far larger than previously thought.  A1


LITTLE NEW IN FORD PACT
The U.A.W.'s new labor contract with Ford breaks little new ground, increasing
workers' wages and preserving their benefits.  D1

Some other industries are jettisoning the two-tier wage system.  D1

2 SENATORS BOW OUT
Senators Dennis DeConcini of Arizona and Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, both
dogged by ethics questions, are planning to retire.  A18

NEW STRATEGY FOR DRUG WAR
The Clinton Administration is planning fundamental changes in the way the United
States fights the drug war, including a probable scaling back in the effort to
catch smugglers in Latin America.  A12

HUNT FOR TOURIST'S KILLERS
The police search for the young killers of a British tourist has divided the
normally quiet Deep South town of Monticello, Fla.  A12

New York will update safety pamphlets for tourists.  A12

Law Page B8

Federal Judge Charles Richey talks tough but wants to be liked.

A hardened criminal can't stand life on the outside.

At the Bar: In Maine, the lobstermen and bathroom doors are tough.

Metro Digest B1

GIULIANI PLAN ON HOMELESS

Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor of New York
City, said yesterday that he would drastically curtail services to some homeless
people, setting a 90-day limit on many shelter stays.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-30

New York Is Book Country fair.  C1

Ralph Lauren's Polo goes solo.  C3

Kasparov and Short agree to a draw.  C30

For Children C25

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

"The Madness of George III." C1

Film: "The Age of Innocence." C1

Dance: Twyla Tharp at City Center.  C3

Restaurants C24

Art: Vija Celmins.  C19

Books: "A Woman's View." C29

Television: TV Weekend D17
Home Video D17

Sports B10-15

Column: Vecsey on mediocrity in baseball.  B11

Football: Smith and Cowboys agree to terms.  B11

Giants and others put out "Beware of Cowboys" sign.  B11

Hollywood's Notre Dame "mutiny." B11

Obituaries B9

Hall Bartlett, film director.

Peter Mark Schifter, director.

Joseph G. Smith; helped NBC choose the peacock as a symbol.

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

Now shake hands with Vietnam.

The sound of 9 justices flapping.

Finally, back to school.

Mr. Rohatyn and a city's debt.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: "The Holocaust syndrome."

Anthony Lewis: The crux of the deal.

Carol Ann Rinzler: Estrogen trials -- and errors.

Alexander M. Schindler: Memo to a hawk.

Chronicle B6

Crossword C30

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Slain Officer's Family, Anger, and Forgiveness

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 16


For a Boston police family, with three brothers and two generations on the
force, time has healed some, but certainly not all, of the bitterness over the
murder of Officer Walter Schroeder Sr.

"She's part of the cause of why my husband's not here and that's all there is to
it," the widow, Marie Schroeder, said, referring to Katherine Ann Power, who
surrendered this week acknowledging her role in the 1970 bank robbery in which
Walter Schroeder was fatally shot in the back.

"Her family can say that they missed her on Christmas and all those holidays.
What about my children who haven't had a father?"

Mrs. Schroder spoke in an interview with WBZ-TV in Boston tonight.

In a statement released by her lawyer, Ms. Power said the bank robbery was
rooted in the Vietnam War. But Officer Schroeder's daughter, Sgt. Claire
Schroeder, said in a television interview: "I was a senior in high school and I
thought the Vietnam War was wrong but I don't recall going out and robbing banks
and killing people to express myself."

Other relatives spoke about the man who was a local hero, one expressing
forgiveness, and another saying that it was all still too painful.

Marie Schroeder had been left alone to raise nine small children in a housing
project, and it had not been easy, though they had suffered privately, saying
little to reporters over the years. In a terse interview with The Boston Globe
printed Thursday, a daughter, Sgt. Claire Schroeder, said bitterly that while
her family had been struggling with her father's death, Katherine Power had had
a life in Oregon.

A Family Tradition

"My father's murder seems to have had a great deal more impact on my family's
life than it has had on hers," she said.

In the family tradition, Sergeant Schroeder is a police sergeant in Waltham,
Mass. Her brother Paul is a detective on the Boston force. Another brother,
Edward, is a law-enforcement officer in Colorado. Two of Walter Schroeder's
nephews, Eddie and Jerry Rautenberg, are Boston police officers.

Walter Schroeder, who was a World War II veteran, had followed his older
brother, Francis, onto the force in 1951, and their oldest brother, John, had
followed them.

In Boston, Walter Schroeder was a hero. In 1968, he received the department's
highest honor, the Walter Scott Medal for Valor, for disarming three bank
robbers. The scene was the State Street Bank & Trust Company, in Brighton, where
two years later he was shot trying to stop another robbery.

Four years earlier, Officer Schroeder and his partner had rushed into a burning
building at 2 A.M., and gone door to door, rousing all 19 occupants and helping
them to safety.

"Walter was brave," said Officer Jim Browning, who was a rookie cop in Officer
Schroeder's unit. "But he was very unassuming. Someone said to me, 'Walter
grabbed someone with a machine gun.' I said, 'What!' "

In an article several years ago, The Boston Globe wrote that "the Schroeder
family is to Boston police work what the Kennedy family is to politics." Not
only had several members dedicated themselves to law enforcement, but two had
been slain in the line of duty. Three years after Walter Schroeder was killed,
his brother John was gunned down during a hold-up at a savings and loan company
here.

Walter Schroeder's other family -- his fellow police officers -- have been
pouring out their resentment and loss, along with their relief that a
23-year-old case can finally be closed. "I remember when President Kennedy was
shot, and when Walter Schroeder was killed," said Jerry Vanderwick, 47, who had
been a rookie in the same unit as Officer Schroeder at the time of his death.
"All the younger officers looked up to him. We were all devastated. It was so
cruel the way they killed him."

The Schroeders were a close extended family who went to St. Anthony's Roman
Catholic Church together every Sunday. And at least once a week for 23 years,
Walter Schroeder's nephew, Francis Jr., has thought about the bank robbery. "I
wondered, 'Why did it happen?' " he said today. "Every once in a while I took
out all the newspaper clippings to show to my children."

Mr. Schroeder, 49, said he had told his 12-year-old son and 10-year-old daughter
that their great-uncle was killed in a bank robbery. In his talks with his
children he has never connected the bank robbery to the Vietnam War. "The
Vietnam War has nothing to do with it," said Mr. Schroeder, who is a manager for
an insurance company in Braintree.

Twenty three years ago, Mr. Schroeder was a student at what was then Boston
State University and is now the University of Massachusetts. He was opposed to
the war, he said, but he was too busy working his way through college -- as a
stockboy and a mail carrier -- to protest. It pained him deeply when his uncle's
death became a cause for celebration among some campus radicals.

"It was very difficult to go to school when these different radical groups
handed out these pamphlets saying, 'Pig is dead,' after my uncle was killed," he
said. "I got into a lot of arguments. You just snap."

With Ms. Power's surrender this week, Mr. Schroeder found that something inside
had changed. "I was very angry back then," he said. "If this had happened back
then, I would've said, 'Put her up against the wall and shoot her.' "

He hated Katherine Power, he said. "I would have loved to have taken her to my
aunt's house to show her what she did -- to show her those nine children," he
said.

But now, Mr. Schroeder said, he finds himself forgiving Ms. Power. "For 49 years
I was taught to forgive -- by my church, by my father," he said. "It gets
embedded in you more and more as you get older. We have a very short life to
live. There's no use hating people. I want my children to forgive."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Officer Walter Schroeder Sr. (1969)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 17, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Now Shake Hands With Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 481 words


Sooner or later some American President will find the courage to end
Washington's now-pointless vendetta against Communist Vietnam. That President
might as well be Bill Clinton and the time might as well be now.

The public debate on U.S. Vietnam policy focuses on Hanoi's cooperation in
locating the remains of servicemen listed as missing in action since the Vietnam
War. But the biggest obstacle to normal diplomatic and economic relations is
America's wounded national pride and White House fears of a ferocious backlash.

This week President Clinton took the latest in a series of modest steps meant to
reward increased Vietnamese cooperation in the search for M.I.A.'s.

George Bush began the process last year by letting U.S. companies prospect for
future business in Vietnam. Then Mr. Clinton dropped longstanding American
objections to loans for Vietnam from international development banks. He also
stationed American diplomats in Vietnam for the first time since the war's end.
On Monday the Administration announced that U.S. companies could bid for
business financed by the development loans.

These steps are all welcome, but there's no good reason not to go all the way.

Controversial documents recently unearthed from Soviet archives suggest that
Hanoi may have understated the number of prisoners it held 20 years ago. But
despite the claims of Senator Robert Smith of New Hampshire and others, there's
no persuasive evidence that any Americans are still being held. Meanwhile,
Clinton Administration officials report that Vietnam's Government is actively
cooperating in the search for M.I.A. remains.

Even if Americans were being held captive, the chances of discovering them could
only be improved by an increased U.S. diplomatic and business presence in
Vietnam. If convincing new evidence were found, American sanctions could be
reimposed, and allies could be asked to join in.

The embargo did apply effective pressure on Vietnam in the 1980's, when other
countries also restricted trade and investment to protest Hanoi's occupation of
Cambodia. But most countries dropped their restrictions when Vietnam withdrew
its troops and cooperated with efforts to establish an elected Cambodian
government.

Now America's European allies, along with the main non-Communist governments of
Asia, are forging new links with Hanoi, sustaining its pro-market reforms and
encouraging its peaceful integration into the Asia-Pacific region. With the rest
of the world investing and trading in Vietnam, the U.S. embargo has little
effect. In the small Vietnamese market, America's absent companies are readily
replaced.

America's interest in Vietnam lies in successful reform and regional
integration, not endless refighting of the domestic politics of the Vietnam War.
There may never be a politically smart time to take the plunge. But the right
time is now.


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN PRINCE WILL BE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 516 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 17


Cambodia's two major political parties agreed today that Prince Norodom
Ranariddh should be the principal civilian leader of Cambodia's first postwar
government, with his 70-year-old father, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, restored as
King.

The agreement will end an interim arrangement in which Prince Rana riddh, the
French-educated legal scholar who leads the royalist party that won United
Nations-supervised elections in May, has shared power equally with Hun Sen, the
leader of the rival party and the former Prime Minister in the
Vietnamese-installed Government that came to power in 1979.

Under the new agreement, Prince Ranariddh will assume the title First President,
with Mr. Hun Sen his chief deputy, or Second President. Mr. Hun Sen, whose party
came in second in the elections, initially said he and Prince Ranariddh should
continue to have equal authority, and the same title.

King's Role Undetermined

The scope of Prince Sihanouk's powers as King in the new Government is still
undetermined, although given the force of his personality and the popular
support he enjoys, it is difficult to imagine that he will function simply as a
figurehead.

Prince Sihanouk led Cambodia as its monarch from 1941 to 1955, when he abdicated
in favor of his father to run Cambodia as its civilian leader, which he did
until he was overthrown by a coup in 1970. He is still referred to by millions
of Cambodians as Samdech -- King in the Khmer language.

In a statement issued today in Beijing, where he is receiving medical treatment,
Prince Sihanouk said he would return to Cambodia on Thursday to promulgate the
new Constitution. He said he would return to Beijing the next day for an
operation to remove what he has described as a "small tumor" in his colon.

Even though Mr. Hun Sen agreed today to a demotion, he and his party, the
Cambodian People's Party, will doubtless continue to wield significant power,
since they command the loyalty of much of the Cambodian Army and the police.

Mr. Hun Sen said today that while he would now have a lesser title, he would
have a say in all major decisions of the new Government. "The working system
will not change," he said. "The only change is the new title."

Prince Ranariddh agreed that Mr. Hun Sen would maintain broad authority. "I will
continue to implement the consensus rule," the Prince said. "I have to have the
consent of Hun Sen."

Leader of Royalist Party

The 49-year-old Prince has led the royalist party, known as Funcinpec, since
1989. He gave up a comfortable academic life in the south of France to serve as
a commander of rebel armies seeking the overthrow of the Government installed by
Vietnam after it invaded Cambodia. The civil war was formally ended by a 1991
United Nations peace treaty, although the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group, which
dropped out of the peace efforts last year and boycotted the elections in May,
maintains a significant military force.

The new Government is expected to take power within a few weeks, after the newly
elected National Assembly completes work on the Constitution.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Divided by Shared Grief: Slaying Shatters Two Proud Army Families

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2579 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C.


Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves spends his time these days in the suffocating
brig here, contemplating his cloudy future. A spartan prison jump suit has
replaced the immaculate dress blues he wore in three Presidential inaugurations.
The legs that took him down Pennsylvania Avenue or paraded on the White House
lawn are in irons when he is not in his cell.

For a decade the 33-year-old Sergeant Graves belonged to the Old Guard, the
prestigious Army unit that performs in ceremonies both solemn and festive. But a
man whose record had been as spotless as his uniform now stands accused of
murder. And two proud families, of Sergeant Graves and of woman he is accused of
killing, have been shattered.

The families have much in common quite apart from the grief and anger, despair
and disbelief that flow from their common calamity. Both are black. Both are
steeped in the military, and in the belief that it offers the surest bypass
around bigotry. And until the moment referred to in the Army's "serious incident
report" as "0253, 10 July 1993," both were right.

The Army has charged that at that moment, shortly after Lieut. Lisa N. Bryant
resisted his advances in a bar and returned to a dormitory at Fort Bragg, N.C.,
Sergeant Graves pulled out a .357 Magnum revolver and shot her four times in the
face. Lieutenant Bryant, a 21-year-old participant in a summer R.O.T.C. program
who had graduated with honors from Princeton only a month earlier, died on the
spot.

Could Face Execution

As the evidence accumulates -- one of Lieutenant Bryant's earrings turned up in
Sergeant Graves's dormitory room, and traces of her hair and blood were found on
his shoes -- military authorities have added charges of assault and attempted
rape to the premeditated-murder count he already faces. A court-martial will
likely be convened by year's end. If convicted, Sergeant Graves could be
executed.

Speaking recently in Camp Lejeune's brig, a grim brick box whose ungenerous
windows look more like ventilation slats, Sergeant Graves maintained that he
never even met the victim, let alone harmed her. Though the murder weapon
belonged to him, he said, someone had stolen it from his duffle bag. And on the
night of July 10, he said, the only thing he shot was pool, while consuming
nearly a case of beer.

"I served honorably for the past 13 years," he said softly as other prisoners
(the already-convicted in orange, mere suspects still in blue) huddled with
their families nearby. "All I've ever tried to do is lead a good life."

But Sergeant Graves, a boyish man who speaks in a barely audible whisper,
repeatedly declined to discuss specifics, including how he will plead.

The Families
Unbearable Loss, Unbridgeable Gap

In Fairfax Station, Va., retired Col. Wilbert Bryant and his wife, Emily, are
still trying to fathom how their only daughter, a vital, promising woman who
filled their lives and captivated the Princeton campus, has suddenly been
reduced to memories and videotapes. Venturing into her bedroom is even more
excruciating than visiting her grave at Arlington, near streets where Sergeant
Graves marched hundreds of times with the Old Guard. Their mourning will
continue on Sunday, when Princeton will hold a memorial service in her honor.

In Omaha, Sergeant Graves's family is also in agony. His mother, Ann Starks, who
must take oxygen continually for a lung condition and care for her aging mother,
said she was approaching the breaking point; the sergeant's wife, Renee, who has
known her husband since they were both 5 years old and has borne two sons by
him, has already passed it.

Recovering from a nervous breakdown after a monthlong hospitalization, marooned
at her parents' house while most of her belongings remain packed up in Georgia,
Mrs. Graves now contemplates life without her husband -- which, she fears, could
include bankruptcy and a home in the sort of drug-infested neighborhood she has
thus far spared her boys, now 15 and 12.

"I feel like I'm being punished, too," said Mrs. Graves, who is five credits
short of receiving her degree in psychology. "We're going to lose everything. I
ask myself day by day, 'My God, what have we done to deserve this?' "

With Lieutenant Bryant dead, Sergeant Graves largely mum and the Army saying
little, any reconstruction of events is necessarily sketchy.

Prosecutors are planning to present this account:

Early in the morning of July 10, Lieutenant Bryant and another female soldier
went to the Stilwell Lounge, a bar in the basement of Moon Hall, one of the two
nondescript dormitories in which the traditionally very separate world of
officers and enlisted personnel merged temporarily for participants in the
six-week summer R.O.T.C. program.

Crossing a Social Line

There, prosecutors will assert, Sergeant Graves approached Lieutenant Bryant,
perhaps to ask her to dance -- the kind of social encounter between an officer
and enlisted person, or non-com, that has traditionally been almost unheard of.

She asked him to leave her alone and headed for nearby Hardy Hall, where she and
Sergeant Graves lived a few doors apart. She then called her boyfriend in
California, using a public telephone in the second-floor corridor rather than
the private phone in her room to avoid disturbing her roommate.

Her boyfriend later recalled that the phone went dead in mid-sentence. Within
moments, prosecutors will maintain, Sergeant Graves had dragged Lieutenant
Bryant into his room or grabbed her as she went by and was trying to rape her.
She apparently broke free and reached the corridor. Neighbors then heard a
scream, followed by three or four shots. One of her terrified dormitory mates,
barricaded behind doors, looked through a window and saw a van drive away with
its headlights off.

Fifteen or 20 minutes later, while Lieutenant Bryant still lay sprawled in a
pool of blood in front of his door, Sergeant Graves returned to his room. He was
then arrested. He has told his family that when the shooting occurred he was
downstairs loading his van, preparing for exercises the next day.

The Riddles
Bright Ribbons Over a Dark Soul?

Sergeant Graves, who once spent a year along the Demilitarized Zone dividing
North and South Korea, won the good conduct medal four times for blemish-free
service, plus assorted other commendations for air assaults, infantry and
parachuting exercises.

Now his relatives ponder whether he was a latent killer, a spurned suitor who
snapped when a beautiful officer shooed him away, the innocent victim of
mistaken identity, or the target of an Army witch hunt intended to placate a
family with friends in high places.

When they lived in Burke, Va. in the late 1970's, Wilbert and Emily Bryant
became friendly with Colin L. Powell, then a colonel, and his wife, Alma. Their
sons went to school together; Lisa rode her tricycle in front of the Powells'
home. General Powell attended Lisa Bryant's wake, while his wife went to her
funeral.

Colonel Bryant, who retired from the military in 1990 and is now vice president
for student affairs at Virginia Union University in Richmond, denied that the
Army was treating his family preferentially. "It's a murder on a military
installation, and the military is doing what it's supposed to do," he said.

"If he is in fact the individual, I plan to talk to the jury and ask that they
give him the death penalty," he added. "It won't bring my daughter back, but I
believe in an eye for an eye. He summarily executed her, and he's forever
destroyed our lives. If he's not the individual, he should be set free, and we
should start over."

From a Military Family

Sergeant Graves, known to his relatives as "Morrie," came from a military
family. His father-in-law, Otis Reid, spent 21 years in the Army and Air Force;
his aunt drove rivets into the Enola Gay, the B-29 that dropped the atomic bomb
on Hiroshima. For him, the service was a career -- an alternative to the packing
houses, fast-food joints and streets of Omaha.

He enlisted at 20, was regularly promoted ahead of schedule and found a home in
the Old Guard. Standing erect in his dress blues, his medals arrayed proudly
across his chest, his boots and brass polished to a bright shine, he could often
be seen at the White House, a job requiring special clearance. Asked to list his
occupation, he liked to put down "Presidential escort."

In March, he was re-assigned from Fort Myer, Va., to the Georgia Military
College in Milledgeville. But much to his chagrin, before he could unpack his
belongings and retrieve his family from Omaha, he was sent twice to exercises at
Fort Bragg, the second time only a day before the killing.

His relatives had no doubt he would remain in the service until retirement,
seven years away. They maintain he is not only incapable of murdering anyone but
honorable enough to own up if he did. Unable to afford to see him in person,
however, able to speak with him only briefly over what they say are tapped phone
lines, told by his lawyer that Army regulations bar him from discussing even the
most basic elements of the case, they are as bewildered and frightened as they
are protective and angry.

"I can't make heads or tails out of it, and they don't tell me nothing," said
Sergeant Graves's stepfather, Elmer Starks, who has raised him since he was 6
weeks old. "But until he tells me he did it, I don't believe it."

"I know what that Bryant family is going through, and I feel sorry for them
people," said Mr. Starks, a retired telephone company worker who now drives a
bus. "I know how sad death can be. Sometime I wake up thinking this is all a
damn movie."

Could Be Headstrong

Some of Sergeant Graves's colleagues depict a less angelic man than his
relatives do, someone who could be headstrong, who would get drunk occasionally,
who flirted with women. Following one drunken episode two years ago in which he
pointed a loaded gun at his wife, a superior ordered him to surrender his
weapons for a week.

But the superior who handled the matter, First Sgt. Charles L. Thomas,
nonetheless called Sergeant Graves "an outstanding soldier."

"I never saw him, even after drinking, at a point where he wasn't in control of
himself," he said. "It's beyond me to believe he was capable of doing something
of that magnitude."

The Victim
A Way of Life, A Way of Death

Lieutenant Bryant's father and three of her uncles, raised by a single mother in
a steamy South Florida town, all went into the service. After nearly 28 years in
the Army, including tours of duty in Vietnam and South Korea, Wilbert Bryant
rose to the rank of colonel; his brother, Alvin Bryant, became a two-star
general in the Army Reserves.

Whether the setting was military or civilian, Lisa Bryant prospered. At James W.
Robinson Secondary School in Fairfax, she was the first freshman ever to win the
school pageant. As a senior, she was elected most likely to succeed. Then came
Princeton. In a letter to friends shortly before her death, she recalled,
"Because I thought my admission into the university was a big hoax, I didn't
completely unpack until after mid-terms!!!"

She was twice elected to class office and won honors for her senior thesis, on
life in military families. But for all of Lisa Bryant's success on campus, her
experience at R.O.T.C. -- which she once called "a necessary nuisance," and
which covered 80 percent of her tuition costs -- was not nearly so happy. She
largely overcame a lack of stamina and performed well. Less easily surmounted,
her friends and family say, was the enmity of Lieut. Col. George (Bud) Dotsie,
the head of the Princeton program. It was an enmity, they say, that shadowed her
final weeks.

Colonel Dotsie, they say, made uncomfortable by her independence and familiarity
with the military, either passed her up for awards she deserved, gave them to
her begrudgingly, or attributed those she got from others to extraneous things,
like her good looks. Though she had the highest average of any of the seniors
commissioned last June, for instance, he failed to mention that she had
graduated with honors. "That really hurt my daughter," Colonel Bryant recalled.

Lieutenant Bryant had been assigned to find a speaker for that ceremony and got
assurances from Alma Powell that her husband would speak if he were sent a
written request promptly. Colonel Dotsie intercepted her letter, ostensibly
because it was on the wrong letterhead, and kept it for several weeks. By the
time it went out, General Powell was fully booked.

Anxious both to spare her father's feelings and to spare Colonel Dotsie any
recriminations, Lieutenant Bryant rarely made her unhappiness known. Instead,
characteristically, she tried to learn something from it. In a letter to her
father written shortly before her commissioning, she said her "bittersweet"
experience in R.O.T.C. made her better appreciate his accomplishments. "Maybe
someone up there felt that it was time for me to really see how blessed I am to
have you as my Dad," she wrote.

Last spring, Lieutenant Bryant made it clear she did not want to return to Fort
Bragg, where she had served for six hot, boring weeks the previous summer and
had been involved in a car accident. But in a highly irregular move, she was
ordered to appear there two days after her Princeton graduation.

Colonel Dotsie, who described Lieutenant Bryant as "a fine young lady with
tremendous leadership potential," said that he had played no role in her
assignment to Fort Bragg and that he had no inkling of her unhappiness over it.
He said, further, that he bore her no ill will, and he noted that her family had
asked him to deliver a eulogy.

To the Bryants, however, the invitation was double-edged. "He never gave her one
accolade, one moment of recognition," Colonel Bryant said. "This was an
opportunity for him to make amends to Lisa for what he failed to do while she
was living." Emily Bryant was more blunt. "I felt that Lisa would be turning
over in her grave," she said. "But it was no time to hold any animosity."

Colonel Bryant and his wife have established a fund for needy Princeton students
in her memory (Princeton University/Lisa N. Bryant Fund, Post Office Box 140,
Princeton, N.J. 08544). Colonel Bryant, who has never owned a weapon himself,
also hoped to organize a nationwide march against guns and violence.

The Wait
Will the Truth Set Them Free?

As for the family of Sergeant Graves, they must grapple with their own
nightmare, including the chance that the charges against him could stick.

"I thought I had raised them all to respect other people's feelings," said Mr.
Starks. "If he did it, he's so damned ashamed of it, he can't tell me, because
he'd know he'd let me down."

If only he could look his stepson in the eye, Mr. Starks said, he would know,
instantly and instinctively, his guilt or innocence. Colonel Bryant said that if
Sergeant Graves were convicted he, too, would want to look him in the eye -- and
demand an explanation.

But if either came to the brig at Camp Lejeune, it is unclear just how much they
would see. In Sergeant Graves's eyes, there is neither the indignation of the
innocent nor the anxiety of the guilty. Instead, there is nervous intensity of a
man sifting through the evidence, weighing the probabilities, considering his
next move.

"I don't have a lot to be happy about," he said. "I just hope and pray
everything turns out for the best."

NAME: Ervin M. Graves; Lisa N. Bryant

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The time when Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves marched in the
prestigious unit that performed at the White House is over. His only duty now is
to await charges of murder; In her brief 21 years, Lieut. Lisa N. Bryant had
graduated with honors from Princeton and gone on to participate in a summer
R.O.T.C. program. It was there she was killed.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 18, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Prodigal Daughter

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 427 words


After 23 years on the run, Katherine Ann Power has given herself up to
authorities, ready to face punishment for a crime she committed as a student
radical in 1970.

Ms. Power drove the getaway car for a bank robbery in which a policeman was
killed. Along with her comrades, she planned to use the money to buy explosives
to sabotage trains carrying military weapons and to help arm the Black Panther
Party.

It may be hard, especially for Americans older than Ms. Power and for those born
later, to understand how a middle-class girl from Brandeis could participate in
something so patently amoral and reckless. But for a narrow group of her
contemporaries, her reappearance must stir some unsettling memories.

It seems ludicrous now, but in those cynical, angry and weirdly romantic times,
among a small but influential political subculture such acts seemed logical.

It was a subculture formed by the meeting of disaffected middle-class students
and angry African-Americans, both groups newly politicized and fed up with what
they saw as the futility of nonviolent protests. The young whites had failed to
stop the Vietnam War, and faced the threat of being drafted into a conflict they
abhorred. For the young black revolutionaries, the murder of Martin Luther King
Jr. was the death knell of nonviolence. They felt that the legal victories of
the civil rights movement made no difference to the residents of urban ghettos.

Inspired by revolutionary movements in Latin America and East Asia, the two
groups briefly came together and shared their anger. They lived in armed
"collectives." They built bombs. They planned acts of sabotage. They played at
politics. Now it all seems repellent and hard to fathom.

Those "revolutionaries" are grown-ups now, most of them responsible citizens.
Many, aghast at their own excesses, don't like to talk about those days. Some of
them took years to fight their way back to faith in America. Some made uneasy
compromises. Many still hover at the edges of society, unsure where they belong.

For Katherine Power, exile finally became unbearable. Eluding punishment, she
found only depression. As her mother said, "She's been in prison all her life."
Now, paradoxically, her escape from that prison will lead her to jail.

Her crime must not be made light of, but she can be understood. Not all the
casualties of the 60's served in Vietnam. Some, like Officer Walter Schroeder,
were victims of the era's lunatic "revolutionaries." Others walk among us, still
trying to make sense of the past, or to pay for it.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 920 words



A MAN'S PLACE
By Annie Ernaux. Translated by Tanya Leslie.
Ballantine, $9.
In "A Woman's Story," the author wrote of her estrangement from her mother. This
fictionalized autobiography deals with her father, a humble man who was proud of
his educated daughter but never understood her. Last year our reviewer, Miranda
Seymour, praised Annie Ernaux's "bleak honesty" and "refusal to let herself off
the hook of guilt."


 THE INVISIBLE EPIDEMIC: The Story of Women and AIDS
By Gena Corea. Harper Perennial, $12.
The author argues that the medical establishment has responded to AIDS in the
female population in the same way it has reacted to other women's health issues:
with skepticism, condescension and an unwillingness to pursue research. "Ms.
Corea is more than willing to speak uneasy truths and to draw an explicit
connection between women's invisibility in the AIDS epidemic and the politics of
gender," Marian Sandmaier said here last year. Harper Perennial has also
reissued AGAINST THE ODDS: The Story of AIDS Drug Development, Politics and
Profits, by Peter S. Arno and Karyn L. Feiden ($12), which shows how Government
regulations have stymied attempts to find new remedies for the disease. Last
year our reviewer, Charles C. Mann, said, "For those who want to know how the
story stands now, 'Against the Odds' is a fascinating introduction." The debate
on the spread of the infection is analyzed in HISTORY OF AIDS: Emergence and
Origin of a Modern Pandemic, by Mirko D. Grmek, translated by Russell C. Maulitz
and Jacalyn Duffin (Princeton University, $16.95). The viruses causing AIDS
might have existed for centuries, says the author, a physician and historian.
And while they may have evolved in African primates, Africa is not necessarily
the source of the human epidemic. "Even those who have devoured the literature
on AIDS will find this a deeply stimulating book," Erik Eckholm said here in
1990. Paul Farmer, a doctor and anthropologist, explores similar themes in AIDS
AND ACCUSATION: Haiti and the Geography of Blame (University of California,
$13). He explains that rather than being agents of transmission, Haitians were
probably infected by visitors from the United States. Last year one reviewer
said he "brings Haitian culture powerfully to life."
ALL STORIES ARE TRUE
By John Edgar Wideman. Vintage Contemporaries, $10.
These new pieces, published last year in "The Stories of John Edgar Wideman,"
evoke the author's boyhood in inner-city Pittsburgh as well as the bleak fates
of the poor who live there now. "The more you read . . . the more impressive he
seems," Michael Gorra said here.
THE END OF EQUALITY
By Mickey Kaus. New Republic/Basic Books, $12.
The author wants welfare eliminated, arguing that the Government should be
supplying public jobs, health coverage and day care rather than checks. Last
year our reviewer, J. Anthony Lukas, called his book "an intriguing work of
political-economic theory."
LIFE-SIZE
By Jenefer Shute. Avon, $10.
Josie, the narrator, suffers from anorexia, and by sharing her obsession,
provides a window onto its madness. "The reader becomes absorbed in Josie's
plunge into hell," Crescent Dragonwagon said here last year.
FOOLSCAP
By Michael Malone. Washington Square/
Pocket Books, $10.
The title refers to a mock-Elizabethan play that has been written by an English
professor, one of the many unsung toilers in academe. After a famous playwright
absconds with the work, scholars begin to claim that Sir Walter Raleigh wrote
it. "One remembers [Michael Malone's] idiosyncratic creations the way one
remembers those of another brilliant social caricaturist, Charles Dickens,"
Richard Bausch said here in 1991.
THE MISBEGOTTEN SON. A Serial Killer and His Victims: The True Story of Arthur
J. Shawcross.
By Jack Olsen. Island/Dell, $5.99.
This book about a notorious criminal who had been imprisoned for murdering two
children, then killed 11 prostitutes while on parole in the 1980's, transcends
the true-crime genre, said our reviewer, Andrew Vachss. Earlier this year he
praised it for making "a genuine contribution to criminology and journalism
alike."
STRANGE BEDFELLOWS: The First American Avant-Garde
By Steven Watson. Abbeville, $19.95.
The author explores the passions, both artistic and personal, of Ezra Pound,
Eugene O'Neill, Marcel Duchamp, Hilda Doolittle and many others active between
1913 and 1917. In 1991 our reviewer, Lois E. Nesbitt, said he "spins his yarns
with energy and fair-mindedness."
INDIGO
By Richard Wiley. Plume, $10.
It is 1983 and Jerry Neal, a white educator in Lagos, Nigeria, is oblivious to
the country's internal struggles until he becomes both a pawn and an unwilling
player in a dangerous game of political power. This novel combines "provocative
themes with solid storytelling," Nicholas A. Basbanes said here last year.
SILVER STALLION: A Novel of Korea
By Ahn Junghyo. Soho, $12.
During the Korean War, Mansik, a boy in a small South Korean village, sees his
mother forced into prostitution and his own values compromised as the
"liberators" invade. Mr. Ahn "is a strong writer and graceful translator of his
own prose," David Murray said here in 1990. Soho has also reissued the author's
earlier book, WHITE BADGE: A Novel of Korea ($13), whose hero is tormented by
his memories of fighting alongside the Americans in the Vietnam War. In 1989 our
reviewer, Bill Kent, found the prose awkward, but praised the strength of "the
book's despairing end."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: September 19, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  58   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      2   4   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 3      4  23   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 4      3   6   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 5      5  27   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself,
                presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 6      6   7   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 7      7   2   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Concluding the "Griffin & Sabine" trilogy, about an artist and
                his secret admirer.

 8     10   2   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.

 9     12   2   THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero,
                including his rebirth in the near future.

 10     8  10   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.

 11     9  13   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 12*        1   STARLESS NIGHT, by R.A. Salvatore. (TSR, $16.95.) A fantasy
                tale about an elf who returns to his birthplace to deal with
                the legacies of his past.

 13    13   8   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
                (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a
                surgeon's daughter.

 14    14  16   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a
                multimillion-dollar fund.

 15         1   CONSIDER THIS, SENORA, by Harriet Doerr. (Harcourt Brace,
                $21.95.) Four emigres from north of the border try to get
                accustomed to a Mexican village.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2   2   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 2      1  19   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 3      3   5   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 4      4  58   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 5      6   4   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 6      5  10   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 7      7  15   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 8      8  53   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.

 9     10  40   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 10     9  14   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.

 11         1   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

 12*   13  13   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

 13    11  15   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                and radio commentator.

 14    12  10   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House,
                $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.

 15    14  31   HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.)
                Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship
                of sickness to thoughts and emotions.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   8   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      3  12   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 3      2  18   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4      4   3   FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins,
                $25.) Ways to prevent and treat many illnesses and complaints.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 4, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11
lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs. Gallant's
wit and exactitude subvert her old-fashioned material.
"DADDY'S GONE TO WAR": The Second World War in the Lives of America's Children,
by William M. Tuttle Jr. (Oxford University, $30.) A historian finds that some
"home front children" still feel indoctrinated in fright and hate, while others
believe the war enhanced their understanding of this country and its culture.
EPSTEIN: Artist Against the Establishment, by Stephen Gardiner. (Viking, $35.)
This polemical book defends at every point a major artist who all his life
defied bourgeois conformity yet managed to die the proprietor of a knighthood.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &
Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where
James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
LET THE SEA MAKE A NOISE ... : A History of the North Pacific From Magellan to
MacArthur, by Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $30.) Lively narrative, bold
analysis and prodigious research adorn this popular history of a vast sea
surrounded by mutually mistrustful peoples.
MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A Reporter's Life, by Malcolm W. Browne. (Times
Books/ Random House, $23.) The memoir of a bold foreign correspondent who has
seen 20th-century mayhem from Indochina to the Persian Gulf.
NEW YORK DAYS, by Willie Morris. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) Mr. Morris's memoir of
his star-crossed romance with Harper's Magazine, where he became editor in chief
in 1967, just in time for the weirdest part of the 60's, and held on till 1971.
NO OTHER LIFE, by Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $21.) A brilliant
meditative novel about a place that is and is not Haiti and a visionary who is
and is not Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's once and future President.
NOT WHERE I STARTED FROM, by Kate Wheeler. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) This
first collection of stories is about searchers shopping for enlightenment and
the cross-cultural dislocations that come from such a hunt.
SECOND SIGHT, by Robert V. Hine. (University of California, $20.) A splendid
personal account by the recipient of a miracle, a historian who slowly lost his
eyesight and suddenly got it back.
A TIDEWATER MORNING: Three Tales From Youth, by William Styron. (Random House,
$17.) The author's memory plays upon the painful moments of his life at the ages
of 10, 13 and 20; the result is a trio of stories, each of whose sadness is
multiplied by the presence of the others.
A VERY LONG ENGAGEMENT, by Sebastien Japrisot. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.)
In this evocative, outlandishly realistic French novel, a young woman pieces
together how her fiance became a casualty of World War I.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHAT'S DOING IN;
Washington

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY;  IRVIN MOLOTSKY is an editor in the Washington bureau
of The Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 10; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1854 words


Fall is an excellent time of the year to tour Washington. The cherry blossoms
may be gone, but so too are spring's legions of visiting schoolchildren and the
vacationing families of summer, so the lines are short. With one new museum and
another recently reopened, a rarely performed opera and a Pulitzer Prize-winning
drama, there's plenty to see and do. Fall does have its compensations.

And while a good deal was made of Queen Elizabeth II's recent decision to open
Buckingham Palace to tourists for about $12 a person, the White House has been
open for years and has never charged admission. The Smithsonian Institution, one
of the world's largest museum complexes, and the National Gallery of Art are
also free. In fact, the city's principal attractions -- from the Washington
Monument to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial -- are free, though some will point
out that we have paid for them many times over with taxes.

Sightseeing

A tour of the White House includes only the public rooms, not the President's
private living quarters, so visitors aren't likely to see the Clintons and
Socks. It does include the East Room, with Gilbert Stuart's large portrait of
George Washington that was rescued by Dolley Madison when the British burned
down the White House in 1814. Another Stuart portrait of Washington -- the one
featured on the dollar bill -- hangs in the Diplomatic Reception Room.

Tickets for guided White House tours may be obtained from your member of
Congress. Members can be reached by calling the Capitol switchboard at (202)
224-3121. These tours begin between 8:15 and 9 A.M. and last 35 to 45 minutes.

Self-guided tours may be taken from 10 A.M. to noon simply by showing up at the
east entrance of the White House on East Executive Avenue, across from the
Treasury Building. The White House advises arriving early, especially during
holidays.  All tours are given Tuesday through Saturday year round; it is best
to call first (202-456-7041), as they are occasionally canceled for events
taking place inside.

At the Capitol Building, visitors have a few more weeks to get a close view of
the Statue of Freedom, the 19-foot-tall bronze of a woman in Roman warrior robes
by Thomas Crawford. The statue had been atop the building for 130 years until it
was lowered to the East Front in April for a sprucing up. It will be returned to
its perch on Oct. 23.

The Capitol is open for tours every day except Thanksgiving, Christmas and New
Year's Day. Guided tours leave from the East Front entrance from 9 A.M. to 3:45
P.M. One stop is Statuary Hall, which contains statues of people selected by
their home states (Oklahoma, for example, selected the Cherokee leader Sequoyah
and the humorist Will Rogers). It is said that John Quincy Adams, the only
person ever to win election to the House after having served as President,
discovered that a quirk in the room's construction allowed him to overhear
legislators' whispers on the other side of the chamber.

Besides the workings of government, there are many works of art in the Capitol,
including three Gilbert Stuart portraits of George Washington as well as
Washington paintings by Charles Willson Peale and Rembrandt Peale; three
sculptures by Augustus Saint-Gaudens, and two paintings by Albert Bierstadt.
Tour information: (202) 225-6827.

Those who want to see Congress in action should visit the offices of their
Representatives or Senators or write them in advance for passes to the chambers.
In addition, House and Senate committee hearings are open to the public. They
are listed each day, along with the opening times for the House and Senate, in
The Washington Post.

Across First Street from the Capitol is the Supreme Court, which begins its term
on the first Monday in October -- Oct. 4 this year. The Court hears one-hour
arguments (30 minutes per side) on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays at 10 A.M.,
11 A.M. and 1 P.M. (and sometimes 2 P.M.) for the first two weeks of each month.

People line up for admission in the morning in either of two lines. One is for
seats, and those visitors may not leave until the argument is completed. A
faster-moving line shuttles visitors in for a three-minute dose of
jurisprudence. When the Court is not in session, 20-minute lectures about it are
given weekdays in the courtroom from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. Information: (202)
479-3030.

This time of year turns out to be the best time to see this year's biggest
attraction, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum where, for the first
time since it opened April 26, tickets need not be obtained in advance. Tickets
for the permanent exhibition can be obtained at the entrance on 14th Street,
S.W., just below Independence Avenue, from 9 A.M. until 3:30 P.M. for entry at
designated times that day. The museum is open from 10 A.M. until 5:30 P.M.
Information: (202) 488-0400.

Events

Richard Thomas is appearing in "Richard II" through Oct. 31 at the Shakespeare
Theater, 450 Seventh Street, N.W., (202) 393-2700. Tickets are $15 to $45.

Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night" is being performed at the Arena Stage, Sixth
Street and Maine Avenue, S.W., (202) 488-3300, through Oct. 31. Tickets are $20
to $39.

Ford's Theater, at 511 10th Street, N.W., (202) 347-4833 or (800) 551-7328, is
presenting "Beau Jest," from Tuesday until Oct. 24. Tickets are $23 and $34.

The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts has its usual full bill. Andrew Lloyd
Webber's "Phantom of the Opera" will run until Oct. 2 in the Opera House, with
tickets $23.75 to $60. (Because of a strike by members of the Opera House
Orchestra, the show is currently being performed with an orchestral re-creation
of the original music on tape.) Robert Schenkkan's six-hour Pulitzer
Prize-winning "Kentucky Cycle," designed to be seen in two consecutive segments,
will be performed at the Eisenhower Theater until Oct. 23 with tickets $38 to
$50. The National Symphony Orchestra resumes its season in the Concert Hall on
Oct. 14 with a program of Prokofiev, Rachmaninoff and Sibelius; Richard Hickox
will be conducting. Tickets are $7.50 to $41.50. For ticket and performance
information for the Kennedy Center, call (202) 467-4600.

The Washington Opera opens its Kennedy Center season on Nov. 6 with Donizetti's
"Anna Bolena" with Nelly Miricioiu in the title role, running until Nov. 27.
Eugen d'Albert's opera "Tiefland," which has not been seen in the United States
in 79 years, will be performed Nov. 13 to 28. Tickets cost $47 to $140 and can
be obtained by calling (202) 416-7800 or (800) 876-7372.

The National Gallery, (202) 737-4215, will present an exhibition of 90 original
watercolors painted by John James Audubon for "The Birds of America," from the
collection of the New-York Historical Society, from Oct. 3 to Jan. 2 in the East
Building, Fourth Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W. Hours are 10 A.M. to 5
P.M. Monday through Saturday and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday.

For those who like the creepy and crawly, the Smithsonian Institution's National
Museum of Natural History (at 10th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W.) has
just opened the O. Orkin Insect Zoo, named for the pest-control company, which
features a model of an African termite mound with two million residents.There
are also tarantulas, scorpions and German cockroaches. All Smithsonian museums
are open 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. seven days a week and are free. Information: (202)
357-2700.

Another Smithsonian museum, the Freer Gallery of Art, on Jefferson Drive at 12th
Street, S.W., (202) 357-4880, has reopened this spring after three years. Its
marvelous Peacock Room, which outraged its London owner when James McNeill
Whistler completed it in 1877, has been thoroughly cleaned and new lights have
been installed; the result is dazzling.  Open 10 A.M. to 5:30 daily.

Where to Stay

Across the street from Union Station is the 87-room Phoenix Park Hotel on
Capitol Hill, at 520 North Capitol Street, N.W., (202) 638-6900 or (800)
824-5419. A double costs $179 to $199 a night; weekend rates start at $88 on
Friday and Saturday. On the ground floor is one of Washington's most popular
bars, The Dubliner.

The Tabard Inn, 1739 N Street, N.W., (202) 833-2668, is a small place (40 rooms)
on a lovely street in the Dupont Circle neighborhood with a devoted following.
Single rooms, including breakfast, cost $99 to $130 plus $12 for each additional
person.

Budget: With the construction of the Washington area's safe, modern Metro subway
system, many motels in the suburbs are just a short ride from tourist
attractions. For families especially, the likes of Days Inns and Best Westerns
in suburban Maryland and Virginia provide an attractive alternative to in-town
hotels.

Luxury: The 340-room Willard Inter-Continental Hotel, at 14th Street and
Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., (202) 628-9100 or (800) 327-0200, just two blocks
from the White House, has been spendidly restored to its turn-of-the-century
elegance. Rates start at $315 a night for a double.

Where to Eat

There is now a choice of excellent restaurants in Washington, a far different
situation from the recent past.

When the Willard Hotel was recently completely renovated, so was the Occidental
Grill next door at 1475 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., (202) 783-1475. Its walls are
covered with photographs of movers and shakers once very important to the
nation, but largely unrecognizable today. The menu is New American cooking.
Glazed fillet of salmon (with eggplant, pine nuts and pineapple sage) and pork
chops (grilled with chipotle sauce and peach coulis) formed the entrees for a
recent dinner for two; with an appetizer and bottle of wine, the meal came to
$110.

Pesce, just off Dupont Circle at 2016 P Street, N.W., (202) 466-3474, has the
light, airy, lively feel of a good fish restaurant in Milan or Venice. Since the
fish is bought daily, the specials are written on small blackboards; the fish is
displayed on ice in a large glass case. Dinner for two of prawns with stuffed
pumpkin and risotto with lobster and truffle sauce accompanied by a bottle of
white wine from San Gimignano cost $115. No reservations accepted.

For those interested in trying a little bit of a lot of things, tasty tapas are
served at Jaleo, a handsome new Spanish restaurant at Seventh and E Streets,
N.W., (202) 628-7949), next to the Shakespeare Theater. Meals cost $20 to $25 a
person with a nice bottle of wine, and with a variety of Sherries available by
the glass or bottle.

A midtown favorite is the Cafe Marche, 1810 K Street, N.W., (202) 293-3000,
whose daily specials might include spinach lasagna, couscous, bouillabaisse or
cassoulet. The walls are covered with enlarged photographs of life in Paris in
the 1920's and 30's. About $15 to $20 a person with wine.

The Dupont Italian Kitchen, 17th and R Streets, N.W., (202) 328-3222), in the
Dupont Circle area, offers an old-fashioned pasta or pizza lunch for $10 a
person, and El Tamarindo, 18th Street and Florida Avenue, N.W., in the
Adams-Morgan section, (202) 328-3660, charges about the same for good Latin
American food.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Statue of Freedom. Termite hill at the Smithsonian's new O.
Orkin Insect Zoo and, INSET, tarantula. (Michael Geissinger for The New York
Times)

Chart: "Vital Statistics" lists travel information and statistics on Washington.
(Sources: Runzheimer International, Washington Convention and Visitors
Association, The Times Books World Weather Guide)

Map of Washington.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile: William S. Lerach;
The Pit Bull of Silicon Valley

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1900 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO


The most hated man in high tech? That's easy: Bill Lerach.

William S. Lerach is by most accounts the most prolific and successful
practitioner of the class action that accuses companies of securities fraud.
Typically filed when bad news causes a company's stock price to drop, such suits
accuse management of misleading positive statements to the public in advance of
and with knowledge of a debacle to come. The suits are filed on contingency,
with no plaintiff's fees, on behalf of shareholders said to have invested in
response to the misleading statements.

Such is the notoriety of Mr. Lerach (pronounced LEER-ack) that his name on a
complaint often prompts defendants to settle quickly, colleagues say. He once
won shareholders $100 million in damages from Apple Computer Inc., although the
amount was reduced to $18 million after a judge threw out portions of the case.
In fact, his name has become so synonymous with securities class actions that to
be served with such a suit is called "getting Lerached" by Silicon Valley
attorneys.

"I have his picture on my wall right in front of me -- I hate him," said Al
Shugart, chairman, president and chief executive of Seagate Technology Inc., the
big disk-drive maker. "He and the people like him are a drag on society." Mr.
Shugart has been "Lerached" three times.

High-tech executives contend their companies are singled out because of the
volatile nature of their business, and that most of the suits are specious.
Nevertheless, they say, they are pressured by their boards and their own
attorneys to settle the cases rather than fight to avoid the possibility of a
huge jury award. Such suits divert resources better spent on innovation, and
actually hurt more shareholders than they help, executives say.

Of course, the object of this animosity sees things a bit differently.

"I've been in 400 securities class actions," Mr. Lerach said at the offices here
of his firm, Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes & Lerach. "I've represented a lot of
clients. These people now know they have a remedy if they've been cheated." By
his own estimation, his New York-based firm has distributed more than $4 billion
in damages to investors over the last 20 years.

An affable 47-year-old, Mr. Lerach peppers his language with four-letter
expletives and exudes a righteous indignation on shareholders' behalf. A
converted Democrat who raised money for Bill Clinton, he said the Vietnam War
left him with a distrust of authority that extends to corporations. He currently
has suits pending against Apple, Conner Peripherals Inc. and the Symantec
Corporation, among others. But his firm does not target only high-tech
companies. Indeed, he has also sued Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Charles Keating
and the Walt Disney Company. He even sued the rock group Milli Vanilli on behalf
of fans who were defrauded when it was disclosed that the group's members had
not done their own singing.

According to Mr. Lerach, the high-tech culture is predisposed to a certain kind
of securities fraud. "The compensation at high-tech, high-growth companies is
disproportionately weighted toward stock options," he said. "It creates a
corporate culture where the year-to-year and quarter-to-quarter income levels of
executives are dependent on the price of the stock."

One common element in the suits Mr. Lerach files is a pattern of insider selling
of stocks, preceded by the making of positive comments to the financial media
and securities analysts. He always includes a chart showing that as a company's
stock price declined toward the exercise price of executives' options -- at
which point the options essentially become worthless -- the executives began
making positive public statements that drove the stock price back up. At or near
its high, large amounts of inside sales were made. Then came a report of some
negative development, causing a subsequent plunge in the share price.

THE suggestion that they defraud investors to raise the value of their stock
options incenses executives.

"I think Lerach and his ilk are a very low life form, somewhere below pond
scum," said T. J. Rodgers, president and chief executive of Cypress
Semiconductor Inc. He noted that complaints against Cypress showed two small
stock sales by vice presidents at the shares' high, but ignored his own purchase
of 14,000 shares after the fall. Similarly, the complaints quoted positive
fragments of his remarks while skipping his cautionary statements. "It's
gun-to-the-head carjacking any time your stock goes down," he said.

There may not be a direct intent to mislead, and often there is no way of
knowing, Mr. Lerach concedes. But, he added, the personality of the typical
high-tech chief executive manifests an inappropriate bravado in the face of
danger that leads the executive to make overly optimistic statements. "These are
tough, hard-driving businessmen who have achieved what they have by not taking
'no' for an answer. It's the same kind of drive that can take them over the line
in terms of talking to the securities markets."

What irks executives is that Mr. Lerach's targets include not just such obvious
frauds as the now-defunct Miniscribe Corporation -- whose management shipped
bricks packaged as disk drives in an attempt to raise sales figures -- but also
many of Silicon Valley's upstanding corporate citizens.

"If you believe the allegations, then this industry is made up entirely of
people who commit fraud repeatedly, and I for one do not believe it," said
Thomas R. Lavelle, group counsel for the Intel Corporation, which Mr. Lerach
sued earlier this year. "Look at the number and look at the people getting sued,
and on the face of it you have to conclude a lot of these suits are frivolous."
Mr. Lerach's and other suits against Intel were dropped, but not before the
company spent $1 million defending itself.

Mr. Lerach said he will drop a suit if it appears marginal, or if the company's
attorneys can convince him there was no intent to mislead. He has backed out of
recent claims against Hewlett-Packard, 3Com and Silicon Graphics. But he said a
company's historical behavior has no bearing on his actions. "The fact that you
go to church on Sunday doesn't mean that you are incapable of securities fraud,"
he said.

Some people question whether Mr. Lerach's suits really help shareholders. Ralph
Whitworth, president of the United Shareholders Association, said the kind of
suits Mr. Lerach brings do not in fact compensate shareholders or penalize the
perpetrators of fraud. This is because executives inevitably elect to settle.
And they rely on directors-and-officers insurance, which is paid for by the
company and, indirectly, by the shareholder, to cover the settlement.

ANY sharp decline in a company's stock price will get Mr. Lerach moving. If a
subsequent investigation shows a pattern of positive messages from management,
particularly when coupled with large sales of shares by officers and directors
prior to the bad news that prompted the stock to drop, he will file a complaint.
Computer data bases and search programs make it easy to compile company news
releases, analysts' reports and articles as evidence, Mr. Lerach said.
Plaintiffs are typically investors with relatively small holdings -- 10 to 100
shares.

High-tech executives say the bulk of claims brought against them are filed as
soon as computers indicate their stock has dipped 10 percent, with just a few
names and quotes changed from one suit to another. They say the suits are filed
so rapidly after a stock drops they cannot possibly be based on thorough
investigation, and they are instead attempts to fish for damning evidence. Few
of the suits go to trial.

For his part, Mr. Lerach takes particular umbrage at the suggestion that his
claims are computer-generated boilerplate. While he delegates management and
litigation duties to partners and associates, he insists on writing each claim
himself, at least partly because he enjoys doing it, he said.

"Nothing makes me happier than crafting a terrific complaint, or a good brief,"
Mr. Lerach said. "To me, doing what I'm doing is like a painter painting, or a
sculptor sculpting: it's work, but it's a labor of love."

A twice-divorced father of two teen-aged daughters, Mr. Lerach plans to wed a
third time this fall. Often working from 7:30 A.M. to midnight, sometimes seven
days a week, he said: "I live and breathe this business.  It's all I do with my
life."

Indeed, his workaholism, his ruthlessness and, above all, his entrepreneurism
give Mr. Lerach a lot in common with the executives he sues. Like them, he risks
his own firm's capital on lengthy projects of uncertain outcome. Were he not
their adversary, many of the executives might admire the very traits that now
elicit their ire.

Bruce Vanyo, an attorney with Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, a Palo Alto,
Calif.-based firm that has fought 75 class actions in six years, considers Mr.
Lerach among the "ablest of plaintiffs' attorneys." But, he said, "I think he's
gotten carried away."

Mr. Lerach counters that there are simply more public companies now, and that
the current bull market has created a situation in which companies of lesser
quality can go public. "This market," he said, "will keep me in work till I'm
90."


TAKING A BITE OUT OF APPLE

HERE'S a typical case for William S. Lerach. On June 9, Apple Computer Inc.
warned analysts that its earnings would be down. On July 15, Apple disclosed
that it would report a quarterly loss of $188 million, due in part to charges
associated with 2,500 layoffs and the writedown of excess inventory. It made its
announcement after the market's close. The following day, the company's shares
plummeted 27 percent, to $27.50, from $37.75, the largest percentage decline in
Apple history. On July 21, Mr. Lerach sued Apple, its officers and directors,
charging violation of Federal securities laws.

In his 70-page complaint, Mr. Lerach alleges that John Sculley, Apple's
chairman, and other Apple executives made misleading positive statements during
the months prior to the July 15 disclosure in order to raise the value of their
stock options. Options, which are commonly issued at high-tech companies, allow
the purchase of shares at a predetermined "exercise" price; their value is the
difference between the exercise price and the current price on the open market.

"We believe the lawsuit is totally without merit," said Kate Paisley, an Apple
official.

Noting that Apple shares had declined from a high of $70 in February 1992 to a
point near the average $42 exercise price of executive options in August 1992,
Mr. Lerach alleges that after that time Mr. Sculley and others embarked on a
scheme to push up the stock by issuing false statements. "Defendants' scheme was
extraordinarily successful," he writes in the complaint.

The complaint notes that Apple insiders sold 439,220 shares, most of them
acquired through the exercise of options, at prices as high as $61.25, "thus
pocketing $25.5 million before the series of disastrous revelations began on
June 9, 1993, which ultimately resulted in Apple's stock collapsing."

The suit was filed on behalf of several named plaintiffs who bought Apple shares
between Oct. 15, 1992, and July 15, but as a class action it seeks to represent
all investors who bought the shares during that period.


NAME: William S. Lerach

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William S. Lerach sues high-tech companies, alleging securities
fraud; Bill Lerach in his law firm's San Diego office. (Photographs by Robert
Burroughs for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Miss Saigon, U.S.A.

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 9; Page 10; Column 3; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif.


Her long blond hair, blue eyes and round, healthy face evoke the sunshine of
Indiana, where she was born. Her full, melodious voice, with its mysterious
minor undertones and subtle quaver, seems to flow directly from the
mist-shrouded valleys of Vietnam, where she has never been.

Although she sings in a language she does not understand, a young American woman
who calls herself simply Dalena has become one of the hottest pop stars in the
culture of overseas Vietnamese. Her casettes and compact disks of Vietnamese
popular songs are top sellers, her concerts are sold out. When she walks through
the mall here in the area known as Little Saigon, as she did one day last month,
she is mobbed.

Small children pursue her. Old men gaze and mutter her name. Camera flashes
follow her like trails of fireflies. "Can we take a picture together with you?"
said a middle-aged Vietnamese man, breathless after running with his wife to
catch up with her. "We just arrived from France."

Like them, thousands of Vietnamese are scattered around the world in a post-war
diaspora. For these rootless and often self-doubting refugees, the young woman
in the girlish dresses and round hats touches a deep chord. She is an American
who admires and seeks to emulate their culture in a land where they struggle to
adapt to others' ways.

"People appreciate Dalena because she appreciates them," said Yen Do, the editor
of the Vietnamese-language newspaper Nguoi Viet Daily News in Westminster.

The man from France, Jacques Pham, spoke of her with wonder: "Some people say
she is half-Vietnamese, but she is not. She is a perfect American. But her
spirit is like a Vietnamese."

Oanh Nguyen, who was visiting this community just south of Los Angeles from her
home in Ohio, tried to put her finger on Dalena's appeal. "The way she sings, I
feel good to think back to the past," Mrs. Nguyen said. "Her singing is very
beautiful and makes me happy. When I listen to Vietnamese singers it makes me
sad."

Playing to this image, Dalena cultivates a demure and wholesome bearing and
rejects proposals that she dress in Vietnamese style. Constantly gracious, she
signs autographs, adorned with a heart, in purple marker and sings a few bars
for her admirers on request.

Dalena (whose last name is Morton) calls herself "the girl next door" and "just
plain old ordinary me," and when asked her age, smiles mysteriously and says, "I
like to think of myself as 22." Whether she is in fact in her 20's or in her
30's, she determinedly retains a little-girl air. She talks with youthful
enthusiasm about her large family, her many pets and the strength of her
religious beliefs.

Beyond image, her success is founded on a stunning ability to mimic the sounds
and rhythms of the Vietnamese language. Like few other foreigners, she can catch
its subtleties of tone and diction, softening consonants, flattening vowels,
sliding her voice over its intonations -- without understanding a word.

"It's a gift from God, that's all I know," she said in a recent interview after
a recording session here.

But perfecting it has taken hard work.  Dalena selects her songs for their
melodies and only learns the meaning of the lyrics after she has memorized their
sounds. "I listen to the songs in earphones over and over again," she said.
"Sometimes I fall asleep at night with the earphones on. Basically, you have to
try to turn your tongue upside down, so I'm studying all the time."

O NCE she has learned the songs, Vietnamese friends explain their meanings, she
said, and she re-translates their explanations into English lyrics, often
inserting them as added verses.

In a conversation at a local coffee shop -- Dalena is not a lover of Vietnamese
food -- she said she began to imitate foreign languages as a child in Florida,
where the family moved from Indiana. Lingering over tea with her mother, Darlene
Arenberg, who is also her manager, Dalena said she did not realize that her
ability was something special until people began asking, "How can you do that?"

Until a few years ago she worked as a ticket seller at Disney World, where
visitors from around the world thought she was a native speaker when she offered
a greeting. Dalena, a devotee of martial arts, often rented Chinese movies, and
found herself picking up Cantonese. Then, she said, about five years ago she
memorized a song in Cantonese and, at the suggestion of an acquaintance, also
memorized one in Vietnamese.

Word spread, and Dalena began performing at Vietnamese weddings and parties. In
1991, she had a six-month engagement at the Ritz nightclub here in what is
effectively the capital of the 700,000-strong Vietnamese community in the United
States, half of whom are in California. Her first recording contract, with a
small Vietnamese-run studio, soon followed.

Since then, Dalena said, she has released five albums and has sung in many
Vietnamese communities in the United States and in Europe. This year, she
traveled to Russia to sing for Vietnamese workers in Moscow and St. Petersburg.
But she said she was still waiting for improved relations between Washington and
Hanoi before traveling to Vietnam, where bootleg tapes of her music are in
circulation.

Of her daughter's success and financial status, Mrs. Arenberg would only say, in
an understatement, that Dalena now earns "more than when she worked at Disney."

But she is still far from a millionaire rock star. Even the top Vietnamese
singers, like Dalena, usually earn no more than $5,000 for a solo concert,
people familiar with that market say, and small local producers rarely offer
royalties after paying just a few hundred dollars for each recorded song.

Dalena has practiced mimicking other languages, and a Korean promoter has been
trying to persuade her to tackle that market. She is intrigued. "I believe I can
sing Korean once I have a good clear song," she said.

Her position seems secure with her Vietnamese audience. "As long as she
continues to use her long dress and have her Vietnamese voice and not have any
scandalous behavior, she will be a Vietnamese star for decades," Mr. Yen, the
editor, said.

The song people asked Dalena to sing in the mall is "Ten Years of Separation," a
popular ballad of lovers whose long parting -- through war or through exile --
has not dimmed their feelings.

"For 10 years I haven't seen you," she sings, in Vietnamese. "For 10 years I
thought the allure had faded. But now I see you again."

The ballad embodies the key themes of Vietnamese pop music, songs that have
hardly changed over the last 30 or 40 years. "There are many new singers all the
time, but not many new songs," Mr. Yen said. "It is as if they were singing all
the time 'Smoke Gets In Your Eyes' and 'Rambling Rose.' "

Dalena admits she knows little about Vietnam's culture or its 1,000-year history
of wars and invasions. Yet, her voice resonates with the poignancy of lost
homes, lost loves, and tragic hope.

"Everyone knows someone who has lost relatives, people who have just
disappeared, sometimes in prison, in the resistance, in refugee camps or on the
high seas," Mr. Yen said, "and suddenly we see them before us, in San Jose, in
the supermarket. That is the spiritual life of the average Vietnamese.

"Everyone has a lot of unanswered questions, and we know that sooner or later in
our lives we should be ready to meet the answer with surprise. All these things
have their echo in the appreciation of Dalena, her voice and her image."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "It's a gift from God, that's all I know," said Dalena, mobbed
by fans in a California mall, of her ability to sing in Vietnamese. (Marissa
Roth for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 781 words



International 3-20

CLINTON MAY FACE BOSNIA DECISION


News analysis: Reports of an imminent accord on Bosnia have put pressure on
President Clinton to confront the prospect of deploying many troops. There is
much skepticism that he will do so.  1

Bosnian Muslims and Croats battled past a cease-fire deadline.  18

NATO considers troop deployment for Bosnia accord.  18

A REVIVAL FOR JEWS IN RUSSIA

The number of Jews emigrating from the former Soviet Union continues to drop as
Jewish life blossoms in a more democratic Russia.  1

A KING'S DIFFICULT CHOICES

King Hussein of Jordan confronts a future in harness with a new Palestinian
neighbor that will challenge the very nature of his dynasty.  12

Shimon Peres reflects on the Middle East's metamorphosis.  12

POLAND'S COMMUNIST HEIRS GAIN

As Poland goes to the polls for the third time since Communism collapsed in
1989, two parties that are outgrowths of the Polish Communist Party are poised
to win.  3

BERLINERS PROTEST OLYMPICS

Over 10,000 protesters marched through Berlin demanding that the city not be
selected as the site for the 2000 Summer Olympics.  6

CRACKDOWN ON AMAZON MINERS

A month after reports that Brazilian gold miners had massacred Yanomami Indians,
the police are raiding illegal mining camps in Colombia, Venezuela and Brazil.
10

GEORGIA'S CEASE-FIRE FAILS

A Russian-brokered cease-fire between Georgia and its breakaway province of
Abkhazia appeared to crumble amid reports of fighting near Sukhumi, its capital.
20

Four Italian officers were wounded in the bombing of a police station.  8

A Neo-Nazi wins an East London election as racial tensions rise.  7

Kasparov and Short draw Game 6 of their match.  52

National 26-44

WHY UNIONS DISLIKE ACCORD

The environmental side agreement for the North American Free Trade Agreement is
much broader than the companion labor agreement, one reason many
environmentalists now support the pact while labor leaders are united against
it.  1

COMPLICATED COMPROMISES

Even before President Clinton presents his health plan to Congress, the
Administration has already agreed to a complex series of political tradeoffs.  1


DRAWBACKS FOR COUPLES

The health plan might be a mixed blessing for many two-income families who now
enjoy excellent insurance coverage.  32

SCANDAL IN KENTUCKY

Kentuckians have been embarrassed, and transfixed, by a stream of testimony
about corruption payoffs and greed in state politics.  26

PITFALLS OF A PROMISE

Five years ago, Duke tried to diversify its faculty by ordering every department
to add one black member by this fall. It didn't happen, and Duke now is the
focus of a fracas over hiring and promotion.  1

PEROT RALLIES FOR RIEGLE

Ross Perot was the headliner at a rally for Senator Donald Riegle of Michigan, a
spectacle that infuriated both the Senator's Democratic Party and the Republican
opposition.  26

TURN FOR THE DEFENSE

Prosecutors have rested their case against two black men accused of beating a
white truck driver and seven other people in last year's riots in Los Angeles.
28

A Menendez brother said he had no choice but to kill his parents.  29

REACHING OUT TO BLACKS

The Democratic Party sought to demonstrate its openness to minorities by
assembling the Administration's leading black officials.  35

A Vietnamese monk tries to heal the wounds of the Vietnam War.  30

Metro 45-56

ASBESTOS CONFUSION DEEPENS

Compounding the disarray as the opening of New York City's schools approaches,
the Board of Education failed to complete a promised list of the elementary and
junior high schools that would have to be closed and those whose schedules would
be reshuffled.  1

RECYCLING AT WORK

The next battleground in the fight to reduce New York City's waste is the trash
basket at work, be it in an office, a restaurant or a factory.  45

REVIVING INDIAN TRADITIONS

Armed with the millions earned by their casino, the Pequot Indians of
Connecticut have begun a sometimes awkward, sometimes poignant effort to bring
Indian culture back to the state.  45

DANCING AROUND THE DEFICIT

Political Memo: With Election Day six weeks away, Gov. Jim Florio and his rival,
Christine Todd Whitman, have yet to grapple publicly with the phantom that will
haunt the next administration, no matter who runs it: New Jersey's annual dance
of the budget deficit.  45

Suspect arrested in slaying of four in the Bronx.  47

Obituaries 54

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Perot, One Rally and 2 Angry Parties

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words

DATELINE: LANSING, Mich., Sept. 18


In the first grand demonstration of the mischief he has in store for the 1994
elections, Ross Perot was the headliner today at a rally for Senator Donald W.
Riegle Jr. here, a spectacle that infuriated officials of both Mr. Riegle's
Democratic Party and their Republican opposition.

Mr. Riegle, who faces a tough re-election campaign here next year, invited Mr.
Perot to join him on the steps of the State Capitol to attack the Clinton
Administration's drive for Congressional approval of the North American Free
Trade Agreement, which is staunchly opposed by the labor interests that make up
a large share of the Senator's constituency.

"I tell you, they're having a bad day in the White House war room watching
this," Mr. Perot declared in his opening salvo. "By now, they've left to the
intensive-care room."

Mr. Riegle's invitation to Mr. Perot was especially galling to White House
officials because Mr. Clinton has agreed to attend a Riegle fund-raising event a
month from today.

Presidential Embarrassment

It is one thing for Mr. Riegle to appeal to Mr. Perot's supporters from last
year's Presidential election, or for him to be one of the most outspoken critics
of the trade pact on Capitol Hill. But it is especially embarrassing in a state
that was crucial in Mr. Clinton's victory that Michigan's senior Democratic
Senator turned to Mr. Perot to help rescue him.

And for Mr. Clinton, the event was a stark demonstration that by campaigning for
the trade agreement, he risks upsetting the fragile Democratic coalition that
includes organized labor.

"Obviously, I wish he were not doing it," David Wilhelm, chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, said of Mr. Riegle's appearance with Mr. Perot.
"But Don Riegle is important to us and the President's going to be up there.
It's going to be a very tight race, and we're going to be in there every step of
the way."

Mr. Riegle's press secretary, Mike Casey, who delighted in calling the event the
"Don and Ross Show," emphasized that it was "strictly an issue-oriented event"
and thus was paid for by Mr. Riegle's Senate office and not his campaign
organization. But it looked like pure politics when Mr. Perot stepped to the
lectern to the cheers of about 4,000 spectators.

While the event was orchestrated by Mr. Riegle, it was Mr. Perot who stole the
show. Amid the hundreds of waving placards and balloons promoting Mr. Perot's
organization, United We Stand America, there were only a few Riegle signs.

Popularity Has Dwindled

And for Mr. Riegle, it was a political benefit to be on the stage with the
Texan. Mr. Riegle's popular support has dwindled in the last two years in the
aftermath of a rebuke by the Senate for his efforts to intervene with Federal
regulators on behalf of the former savings and loan operator Charles H. Keating
Jr.

Mr. Riegle praised Mr. Perot for having "the guts to stand up and give important
leadership" against the trade accord. Though he repeatedly applauded Mr. Perot's
remarks, the Senator was careful not to attack Mr. Clinton himself, saying only,
"On this issue, we've agreed to disagree."

But Mr. Riegle drew his biggest applause when he portrayed himself as outspoken.
"I'll tell you this in the spirit of bipartisanship and nonpartisanship," he
said. "I don't believe any member should be re-elected if they vote for Nafta."

Mr. Perot, however, was not reluctant to talk directly about the President. In
an obvious allusion to Mr. Clinton's efforts to avoid the Vietnam draft, he
asked the audience to shout if they had served in the armed forces. "You guys
and women were willing to fight for this country," Mr. Perot said. "Well let me
ask you this: are you willing to fight to keep your jobs?"

The roar of approval from the union-dominated audience was another illustration
that labor groups, who argue that the trade accord will send many factory jobs
to Mexico, adore Mr. Perot.

Mr. Riegle's motive in allying with Mr. Perot is to solidify support among union
members, whose help will be crucial in the Democratic primary challenge that the
Senator is facing. In the general election, Mr. Perot's tacit yet unspoken
endorsement also could be valuable since the swing votes in statewide elections
often come from those who view themselves as independents.

"Politics makes strange bedfellows sometimes," said Jim Granato, a professor of
political science at Michigan State University. "If anybody was cynical about
politics before, I think this pushes everyone over the edge. Clearly, Riegle
wants to appeal to his constituent base. But he's got the Keating Five thing
around his neck like an albatross."

Democrats are not the only ones unnerved by the Riegle-Perot alliance. Mr.
Riegle is the Republican Party's No. 1 target in the Senate next year, and by
attracting Mr. Perot's support, he shattered the hopes of many Republicans of
forming their own alliance with the Texas businessman.

It is not the first time Mr. Riegle has abandoned predictable party loyalty in
the interest of political self-preservation. He was originally elected to the
House of Representatives in 1966 as a Republican, but in the face of the
Watergate uproar, he allied with the Republican maverick Pete McCloskey in 1972,
and in 1973 became a Democrat.

William Kristol, the conservative strategist who was Vice President Dan Quayle's
chief of staff, said the rally today also raised questions about Mr. Perot. "It
also shows just the incredible hypocrisy of Perot to appear with Riegle, who
embodies everything Perot claims to disdain about Washington," Mr. Kristol said.
"Riegle is the ultimate Washington insider."

A Message From Above

Though Mr. Perot was the biggest attraction here, many spectators said they came
primarily to demonstrate opposition to the trade pact. Dave Pichey, a
47-year-old worker at a Buick plant in Flint, Mich., said he did not fully trust
Mr. Perot or Mr. Riegle, but was heartened by their comments.

"Perot is telling us what we want to hear," he said. "We're all concerned about
our jobs. You've got to hope that the politicians aren't lying to you."

But John O'Neill, a state worker who said he was a registered Democrat, had
little patience for the display. "This is a national event for Ross Perot's '96
Presidential campaign and Don Riegle is his sponsor," he said. "If Clinton
tolerates it, he's nuts."

Critics like Mr. O'Neill were drowned out by the cheers for Mr. Perot -- except
for one thing that spoiled the moment for Mr. Riegle. A plane buzzed over the
Capitol trailing a banner that said: "Remember the Keating 5. Dump Riegle."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot speaking yesterday at the State Capitol in Lansing,
Mich., as he attacked the Clinton Administration's drive for Congressional
approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement. (Peter Yates for The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At a Retreat, a Zen Monk Plants the Seeds of Peace

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: RHINEBECK, N.Y., Sept. 18


First came the clear, resonant sound of the bell, a shining brass bowl held
delicately on the fingertips of a Buddhist nun.

Then came the sound of more than 500 people rhythmically inhaling and exhaling,
among them a contingent of American Vietnam veterans, a large number of
psychotherapists and social workers, and Jewish students of Zen Buddhism who
gathered for a Rosh ha-Shanah service between meditation sessions.

They came to a five-day retreat led by Thich Nhat Hanh, a Zen monk, scholar,
poet and political figure from Vietnam. He was a leader in the opposition to the
war in Vietnam, and he is still striving to heal the wounds.

He believes that the slow, attentive breathing is a key to healing, part of a
Buddhist practice of mindfulness, aimed at easing the pains of history and
planting the seeds of peace.

On Thursday, Claude H. Thomas, who voluntered to fight in Vietnam in 1966 and
1967, recalled going to a retreat just for veterans that Thich Nhat Hanh led two
years ago in Rhinebeck.

"We were given an opportunity to heal by our enemy that our own society never
offered," Mr. Thomas said. He said he had been shot in Vietnam by three men
dressed as monks.

Rehabilitation of Soldier

Now 46 years old, Mr. Thomas went to the earlier retreat after years of problems
and after treatment in a drug rehabiliation program. During the earlier retreat,
he was invited to Plum Village, a small Vietnamese Buddhist community in the
southwest of France, where Thich Nhat Hanh lives. Mr. Thomas, who lives in
Concord, Mass., has written a book of poems and essays on war, which will be
published next year by Parallax Press in Berkeley, Calif.

Since 1966, Thich Nhat Hanh has been barred from Vietnam by both non-Communist
and Communist Governments. In that year he came to the United States as a
spokesmen for monks who thought that reconciliation in Vietnam was possible if
Washington stopped its war effort. He also led a Buddhist delegation to the
Paris talks that produced the peace accords years later.

In the United States, he was welcomed by antiwar groups on college campuses. He
met with Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara. He stood next to the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. when the American civil rights leader first declared his
opposition to the war. After the monk's visit, Dr. King, who had won the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1964, urged that the same award be given to Thich Nhat Hanh.
After the war ended, he organized efforts to rescue boat people fleeing the new
regime.

The Vietnamese monk, who is 67, is in frail health, and many of his disciples
and admirers believe that this may be his last visit to the United States.

The retreat was held at the Omega Institute, an 80-acre center in the Hudson
Valley woodlands for workshops on new and ancient forms of healing and
spirituality.

Focus on the Present

A special tent, 140 feet long, was put up, with a plywood floor for the hundreds
of pads, small stools and cushions of every variety used by the participants for
several hours of meditations and talks by Thich Nhat Hanh each day.

The monk sat in the cross-legged lotus position on a raised platform with two
statues of Buddha in a similar pose. Speaking softly and slowly into a
microphone, he described the state of calm attentiveness induced by conscious
breathing as a way to "bring you back to the present moment in order for you not
to miss your appointment with life."

The same mindfulness could be practiced in walking (inhale on the left step;
exhale on the right), in eating, washing one's face, even brushing one's teeth,
he said.

"If you take good care of the present moment you can take care of the past and
the future," he said. He proposed meditative exercises for "watering the seeds
of joy" so that his listeners could balance, embrace and calm, not suppress or
deny, anger, painful memories and other suffering.

At intervals his talks were interrupted by the bell. All fell silent, spines
straightened, eyelids dropped, and everyone savored three slow breaths.

The bell, Thich Nhat Hanh said, is "the voice of Buddha calling me to my true
home." He advised his listeners to stop their daily activities for three
meditative breaths whenever they heard a church bell or even a telephone
ringing.

Shift in Style of Prayer

On Thursday, however, the bell temporarily gave way to the shofar, the ram's
horn sounded to mark Rosh ha-Shanah. About 150 people attended a service that
began with Zen breathing but moved to traditional prayers and songs.

"Over the last few years, there was a real awareness that a lot of people
attending Buddhist retreats were Jews," said Andy Gold, who conducted the Jewish
service with his wife, Shefa.  The organizers of the retreat "wanted to
accommodate them at the High Holidays," he said, and invited the couple to
arrange the service.

"A lot of people were feeling very conflicted about being here at all," Ms. Gold
said. She is pursuing rabbinical studies at the liberal Reconstructionist
Rabbinical College in Philadelphia, although she and her husband are currently
directing a nondenominational retreat center in New Mexico.

She spent the summer reading Thich Nhat Hanh's books, many of which have been
translated and publshed by Parallax Press in Berkeley and Beacon Press in
Boston. "I tried to link them to the process of T'shuvah," she said, referring
to the re-examination of life that is to take place between Rosh ha-Shanah and
the solemn day of Yom Kippur. "I didn't feel any conflict with this teachings."

"I feel a connection with people on all sorts of spiritual paths," she added,
"but my own tradition is Jewish."

Seeking Religious Roots

Thich Nhat Hanh has urged people to seek their own religious roots through the
practice of Zen mindfulness rather than to convert to Buddhism. But he has
recently begun urging people to vow to follow the "five wonderful precepts," an
updated version of Buddhist teachings that, among other things, forbid taking
any human life, drinking alcohol or exposing oneself to the toxins of violent
entertainment.

This produced some demurrers among participants. One woman said in a small group
discussion that she had worked for abortion rights for 20 years and wanted to
know whether that, or self-defense, conflicted with the precept against taking
human life. There was no answer but a consensus that Thich Nhat Hanh's teachings
would not harshly judge anyone in desperate circumstances.

A small gathering of Manhattanites also debated whether the Vietnamese monk's
emphasis on restoring mindfulness through contemplation of flowers, clouds and
natural beauty generally suited their urban environment.

"Sometimes New York smells like vegetable stock left on the stove for two or
three weeks," said one man, Ed Pickett. "But sometimes with all the lights and
the people running around, the whole thing is like a wonderful field of wild
flowers."

Thich Nhat Hanh will bring his teachings to Manhattan on Monday, leading a
walking silent meditation at 4:30 P.M. from Riverside Drive and 110th Street to
Riverside Memorial Church on 120th Street, where he will speak in the evening.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thich Nhat Hanh, a Vietnamese Zen monk, scholar, poet and
political activist, leading a walk Friday during a five-day retreat attended by
more than 500 people at the Omega Institute in Rhinebeck, N.Y. (Dan Cronin for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fugitive's Surrender Ended a Year of Negotiations

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 18


When Katherine Ann Power turned herself in for a crime she committed long ago as
a student radical, she ended a year of secret negotiations on pay phones, from
hotels and at a rendezvous of her lawyers in San Francisco.

"It really was like something out of a John LeCarre book," said Ralph C. Martin
2d, the Suffolk County District Attorney, describing her surrender.

Ms. Power had gone underground 23 years ago after taking part in a bank robbery
that ended in the killing of a Boston police officer. She surrendered at 7:00
A.M. Wednesday in the parking lot at Boston College, where an F.B.I. agent told
her she was under arrest and a Boston police officer handcuffed her before they
took her away in an unmarked car.

Even the site of the surrender was kept secret until the last minute. "I had no
idea where we were surrendering her until I had a telephone conversation at 6
that morning and they told me," said Rikki Klieman, Ms. Power's Boston lawyer.

The complex, clandestine machinations that led to the surrender began a year and
a half ago when Ms. Power, who suffered from clinical depression, went into
therapy.

Ms. Power later approached Steven Black, a lawyer who practiced near her home in
Oregon, and told him that she wanted to explore the possibility of giving
herself up.

"I used all of my military strategy that I learned in the Army in Vietnam to
help this anti-war radical," Mr. Black said. So after Ms. Power approached him,
he followed an old Army maxim: When in doubt, send a scout.

He wanted to approach the United States Attorney's office without letting it
know where Ms. Power was. So he called an old friend from law school, Greg Cook,
who has a practice in Alaska. It was Mr. Cook who first called the authorities
with the news that Ms. Power wanted to give herself up.

Mr. Black then got in touch with Ms. Klieman, the Boston lawyer, who had handled
other high-profile cases, and she contacted Mr. Martin, the District Attorney.

The negotiations between the lawyers and the prosecutors centered on the length
of sentence that the District Attorney's office would recommend; whether Ms.
Power would serve time in state prison or a Federal one; the order of her court
appearances; whether she would continue to receive the medication she took for
her depression in jail, and whether she would surrender near her home or in
Boston.

Mr. Black said the final sticking point was the date of the surrender. It was
first scheduled for Sept. 7, but Ms. Power pushed it back to Sept. 15 so she
could be with her son, Jaime, 14, for his first week of high school.

Even as her lawyers negotiated the terms of her surrender, the F.B.I. continued
its decades-old search for Ms. Power. Mr. Martin said that the first phone call
he received from Ms. Klieman came just days after he met with F.B.I. agents, who
told him that they were intensifying their investigation, although they did not
say why.

"She surrendered before we were able to locate her," Mr. Martin said.

Ms. Power's lawyers, mindful that the F.B.I. search continued, proceeded with
the utmost secrecy. "I kept my file at home," Ms. Klieman said. "We kept nothing
on our computer. There was no Rolodex."

Ms. Klieman said that she initially called Mr. Black from her office. Then she
began to worry that the F.B.I. would examine her phone bill and see where she
was calling. "At that point I thought it was essential that I not call Steve
Black from my office," she said.

At first, she called him on pay phones and arranged times and places for Ms.
Power to call her back. She began to take advantage of her lecture schedule,
which often took her on the road. "I would arrange to get phone calls at hotels
I was staying at," she said.

She first met Mr. Black on one such trip in San Francisco.

Ms. Klieman remembered arranging one of her first conversations with Ms. Power.
She told Mr. Black to tell Ms. Power to call her at a hotel in Washington. "I
arrived at my hotel in Washington where I was to get this momentous phone call
and they did not have my reservation," Ms. Klieman remembered. "There was no
room at the inn."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SEPT. 12-18: 23 Years in Hiding;
Running on Emptiness: Ex-Student Radical Gives Up

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 216 words


For more than two decades as a fugitive wanted for bank robbery and the slaying
of a Boston policeman, Katherine Ann Power lived a shadow life. She was Alice
Metzinger, small-town Oregon restaurateur, wife, mother and taxpayer. But the
lie became unbearable, and after consulting a therapist for severe depression,
Ms. Power decided there was only one remedy: surrender.

And so, after more than a year of secret talks between her lawyers and
prosecutors, she flew to Boston last week and gave herself up. The onetime
Brandeis antiwar radical pleaded guilty to manslaughter and armed robbery for
her role driving the getaway car, closing a 23-year-old case. The other four
accomplices in the robbery, during which Officer Walter A. Schroeder was shot in
the back of the head, were imprisoned years ago.

For Ms. Power, 44, surrender was apparently a chance to reclaim herself. "I am
now learning to live with openness and truth, rather than shame and hiddenness,"
she said. She blamed the Vietnam War for the robbery.

But for the Schroeder family, her surrender only reopened a painful wound. "Her
family can say that they missed her at Christmas and all those holidays," said
the officer's widow, Marie Schroeder. "What about my children who haven't had a
father?"   SARA RIMER

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Katherine Ann Power (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

High-Minded Pursuit of the Exotic

BYLINE: By Marina Warner;  Marina Warner's most recent books are "Monuments and
Maidens" and "Indigo: Or, Mapping the Waters."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1526 words



READING NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC
By Catherine A. Lutz and Jane L. Collins.
Illustrated. 309 pp. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cloth, $59.95. Paper, $19.95.

WHEN Arthur Rimbaud in "The Drunken Boat" navigated impassable rivers and was
tossed on seas teeming with creatures, when he shuddered in pleasurable horror
at totem poles and at giant snakes, conjuring phantoms of cannibals and deep-sea
monsters, he had never been abroad. He had never even seen the sea. He was an
armchair traveler, an imaginary tourist who had looked at picture books and
dreamed. In this as in many other ways, he was a man out of time.

But the lust for strangeness that courses through his poem was shared by the
late Victorian era in Europe and in the United States. It was the age of
European imperial expansion and the age of a confident, omnivorous appetite for
knowledge. In 1888, some 17 years after "The Drunken Boat" was written, Gardiner
Greene Hubbard founded the National Geographic Society in Washington and began a
bulletin for its members; this periodical would carry readers in ever-growing
numbers on adventures to discover the earth's oddities and the wonders beyond
home.

National Geographic offered a kind of Wunderkammer, or cabinet of curiosities: a
heterogeneous archive of natural specimens, both generic and peculiar, a
collection summing up the Creation for the pleasure and instruction of its
readers. But it also masked, under its high-minded pursuit of scientific
knowledge, a thrilling prurience about other people's bodies, a fearful
inquisitiveness about tribal rites and customs, a thirst for the primitive and
the exotic. The choice of livery for this magazine was no doubt inadvertent, but
yellow, one of the colors worn by the Devil and his acolytes in medieval art,
carried connotations of the forbidden. Indeed the first issue of National
Geographic came out just a few years before Aubrey Beardsley published his
erotica in The Yellow Book. The authors of "Reading National Geographic" do not
comment on the symbolism of the yellow border, but they do acknowledge that for
many young men -- and women -- the magazine was notorious as the first and
perhaps only place they were permitted to look at nakedness.

By 1918, the magazine reached 650,000 households; today the circulation stands
at over 10 million, and the readership, according to surveys, is four times that
number. The journal is a phenomenon of popular culture, like Disneyland and
Elvis and Spielberg and Madonna, but unlike them it has been a wallflower at the
ball of contemporary cultural studies.

In "Reading National Geographic," Catherine A. Lutz, an anthropologist at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Jane L. Collins, a sociologist
at the University of Wisconsin, have rightly decided to remedy this situation.
They ask some shrewd questions about the magazine's character and philosophy;
they attempt to assess its interaction with American history in this century and
its impact on American attitudes and prejudices. Children of the Vietnam years,
the authors are sensitive to the role images play in the making of opinion, and
they correspondingly want to analyze National Geographic's photography to see
how it articulates a national vision and expresses the United States' sense of
its mission in the world.

The book begins with verve, and the reader feels in capable hands. The authors
lay out the magazine's enlightened liberalism, with its built-in belief in
social evolution, its utopian yearnings and its unabashed wishful thinking:
"Only what is of a kindly nature," wrote the editor in 1915, "is printed about
any country or people, everything unpleasant or unduly critical being avoided."
(In 1978, after a short flirtation with controversy and harsh truths, the board
prevailed on the editor to return to the original philosophy and to renounce
what they termed "advocacy journalism.") This is still the magazine's policy.
One photographer described it like this: "In a story about volcanoes, you should
balance the devastation with something good about volcanoes."

This happy-talk, feel-good philosophy can lead to trouble, as it did when
National Geographic celebrated Italy under Mussolini and the Marcoses in the
Philippines. But on the whole, the authors find few instances of blatantly
mistaken propaganda. Instead they trace the ideological messages that they
believe saturate the magazine's text and imagery in less perceptible ways, but,
in trying to uncover and define these, they begin to flounder. As they strike
forward bravely, suddenly the map no longer corresponds to the terrain, the
vegetation gets more tangled, and the slough gets ever deeper.

The first acute problem with their analysis arises from their pre-emptive
certainty that false consciousness is always at work in some pernicious way and
that as the ills of Western supremacy, especially racism, cast a shadow across
the rest of the world and its peoples, National Geographic could not help but
collude. They test the evidence they find in the magazine against the piles of
articles, papers and books written in the last 20 years about issues of
otherness; their appetite for this material is vast, but the accumulation
self-defeating. With an almost Victorian fervor, they resort to measurements and
tables in order to probe objectively. Looking at a sample of 600 National
Geographic photographs, they count naked torsos and bare breasts, add up frank
stares into the camera's lens and compare them with the number of unfocused
gazes, quantify images of dark workers working and white people idling. They
even produce a graph comparing representations of people according to skin color
-- dark, bronze and light.

Trouble is, they find that National Geographic stands up rather well to the
prosecution (or, rather, that their line of questioning fails to deliver much).
So they continue to press the accused. They find that even though the magazine
has correctly avoided showing "natives" lazing about according to stereotype, it
has generally overlooked the history of third-world communities; culture is
perceived to begin only when the West arrives. And even though the magazine has
surprisingly represented women's work in a positive light, it has also committed
various sins: in a photograph of a Burmese woman planting seedlings, the flowers
in her hair were touched up so that her femininity should not seem diminished by
her labors. Thus the authors argue against one fallacy by finding another.

Scolding and reproof have become new forms of criticism, and their joyless
limitations are all too evident here. Ms. Lutz and Ms. Collins concede that the
magazine's universal humanism has earnestly avoided degrading the objects of its
scrutiny. But this will not do: "National Geographic photography both denies
fundamental differences and reifies the cultural boundary that it depicts." One
wonders how the authors would feel if the magazine had decided to affirm
"fundamental differences" -- as the architects of apartheid did. When the
authors say in the epilogue that National Geographic's bland humanism
contributed by default to the demonization of the Iraqis and justified the
bombings, they seem thoroughly confused.

Many opportunities for a deeper analysis have been missed. For instance, the
book describes one photographer's typical shoot in Peru: the children were taken
out of school for the day and dressed in picturesque costumes; then the
photographer, finding that the daylight had gone, decided not to take the
photograph. But here the authors don't give us the economic background (or even
the date) of this episode, which might have provided real evidence of the
magazine's exploitation. The authors' methods have not served them well. They
interviewed a sample of subscribers and nonsubscribers and showed them selected
photographs; this yielded stammerings and giggles, of little consequence.

More important, Ms. Lutz and Ms. Collins, in focusing so intently on coverage of
humans, only glance at the magazine's corpus of nature stories. This is a shame
because the striking change that has taken place in attitudes toward ecology and
the relation between beasts and humans might reveal more about how Americans see
themselves than the enumeration of breasts and gazes does. Likewise,
cartography, one of National Geographic's most powerful departments, earns only
passing mention in this book. As Brian Friel dramatized in his play
"Translations," naming places on the map is the prerogative of the colonizer.

At a time when travel writing has become established as a powerful,
interrogatory literary genre in its own right, when so many artists are
exploring race and strife and Orientalisms, a book called "Reading National
Geographic" could have introduced this comparative material, even if only to
tackle the heart of the real problem about National Geographic: the fact that
its deep wish not to offend has often made it dull. Unfortunately for Ms. Lutz
and Ms. Collins, the condition has proved contagious. For all their policing,
the culprit has not really been brought to book.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A headhunter in Melanesia sleeping with the skull of a victim
under his head to ward off ghosts, in a photograph that appeared in the March
1972 issue of National Geographic. (Malcolm S. Kirk/From "Reading National
Geographic")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chinese Dissident Emerges, Still Unbowed

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Sept. 20


Emerging to speak for the first time since his release from prison, China's most
illustrious political dissident said tonight that if Beijing was trading on the
freedom of a few political prisoners to win the 2000 Olympic Games, it was
indulging in "dirty" politics.

Wei Jingsheng, who met with reporters at his parents' tiny apartment in central
Beijing, said he would not give up the "struggle" for democracy in China, but
would be forced to restrain his activities for three years while he is on
probation.

The former Beijing Zoo electrician, who energized China's 1978-79 Democracy Wall
movement with his simple and eloquent essays and wall posters, was released last
week after serving 14 1/2 years of a 15-year term.

The Sakharov of China

Mr. Wei, the longest-serving pro-democracy campaigner in China, is well known
for his tenacious adherence to his cause and has become as powerful a symbol of
resistance in China as Andrei D. Sakharov was in the former Soviet Union.

Wearing a white polo shirt and tennis shoes, Mr. Wei, 43, smoked a cigarette as
he met with reporters tonight. Although he was relaxed, he measured his words
and asked reporters to quote him accurately, especially on the sensitive subject
of China's Olympic quest.

Fang Lizhi, the Chinese astrophysicist who unsuccessfully urged the Chinese
leadership to free Mr. Wei in January 1989 on the 40th anniversary of the
Communist takeover in China, characterized Mr. Wei's release as a serious gamble
for the Communist leadership.

"These leaders will never accept the principles of human rights and democracy,"
Mr. Fang said in a telephone interview from the United States. "They just want
to use Wei in a trade to get the Olympics."

Mr. Wei was far more cautious, making clear that he did not know whether his
release was a government ploy to enhance its bid for the 2000 Games.

Responding to a question on whether the Chinese authorities would trade the
release of political prisoners in an effort to enhance their bid for the
Olympics, Mr. Wei said he thought any such effort would fail. "The Olympics,
after all, is a kind of sport which should not be mixed with politics," he said.
"If it is changed into a political trade, I think that is very dirty and
abnormal."

He added that in his own view, "It is not compatible with the feelings of the
people and the whole nation to bargain for the Olympics."

Confessing to a heart ailment and the loss of a dozen teeth during his long
incarceration, Mr. Wei said his mental faculties and his will remain unbent.

He said he hopes someday to publish some of his prison writings in China or
abroad.

"I will continue to carry forward political activities, but not for the present
time," Mr. Wei said. "According to Chinese law, probation means I cannot vote, I
have no freedom of expression, I cannot form any kind of organization, even
doing business is not allowed" over the next three years.

He said he was thrust out of prison without notice last week. In the six days
since he was released, he has been staying at an unidentified Government
guesthouse and members of his family have at times said they were becoming
concerned about whether Mr. Wei would be allowed to come home. He would not
discuss his whereabouts since his release.

No Secrets

Mr. Wei was arrested on March 29, 1979, and later sentenced to 15 years for his
anti-government writings and, Chinese authorities said, for passing state
secrets about Chinese troop movements in Vietnam to a foreign journalist. Mr.
Wei said his discussions with journalists were about what he had heard on
official television, and that as an electrician, he knew no such secrets.

Over the years, a number of Mr. Wei's supporters have speculated that the length
and severity of his prison term were partly a result of the special animosity
borne toward him by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, who was the target
of Mr. Wei's most biting criticism. In a 1987 speech, Mr. Deng mentioned Mr. Wei
by name as a threat to Chinese "unity."

If by unity Mr. Deng meant the absolute control of Chinese society by the
Communist Party, he was probably correct in his assessment, for Mr. Wei saw the
perpetuation of this control by Mr. Deng and others as the principal shortcoming
of their reform efforts.

'Shameless Bandits'

In one of his most famous essays, Mr. Wei asked pointed questions about whether
China should characterize Mr. Deng as a hero or villain for having reversed the
course of Mao Zedong's final tumultuous decade in power.

Though Mr. Deng ushered in an era of economic reform under his "four
modernizations" in agriculture, industry, science and technology, Mr. Wei held
him responsible for failing to deliver a "fifth modernization," political
reform, at the same time.

"People should have democracy," he wrote. "If they ask for democracy, they are
only asking for something they rightfully own. Anyone refusing to give them
democracy is a shameless bandit no better than a capitalist who robs workers of
their money earned with their sweat and blood."

Although Beijing released Mr. Wei, human rights organizations said today that
they have learned that the authorities in China are preparing for the largest
crackdown on pro-democracy dissidents in more than two years. They are to start
next month with secret trials to sentence 17 men arrested last year for crimes
related to free speech.

While Chinese officials have made no public mention of the trials, judicial
officials have told families of the defendants that they should try to retain
lawyers, Chinese and Western human rights groups said. In some cases family
members were shown bills of indictment, but authorities refused to provide
copies of the documents.

Trials Denounced

By scheduling these trials in October, the Chinese Government may have been
trying to spare itself criticism in advance of Thursday's vote by the
International Olympic Committee on Beijing's bid to play host to the games. But
when Government prosecuting authorities began contacting family members, word of
the impending trials began to circulate in Beijing.

Today, two human rights organizations condemned the trials. Human Rights Watch,
based in New York, called on the Chinese Government to "drop the charges and
unconditionally release all those arrested for the nonviolent expression of
their political views."

Similarly, Human Rights in China, also a New York group, criticized Chinese
authorities for failing to improve the country's human rights record while
demanding that the international community confer on Beijing the honor of
hosting the 2000 games.

Most of the jailed dissidents are from Beijing and all of them are believed to
be members of pro-democracy and labor reform organizations that sprang up in
secret since the 1989 military crackdown on the mass student movement at
Tiananmen Square.

The outlawed organizations include the Freedom and Democracy Party, the Free
Labor Union and the China Progressive Alliance.

If the trials go ahead as planned in October, said Robin Munro, director of Asia
Watch , the regional arm of Human Rights Watch, in Hong Kong, it would be the
largest cluster of political prosecutions since the trials of the so-called
"black hands" of the Tiananmen Square movement began in early 1991.

"The Chinese leadership appears to be deliberately postponing these trials until
after the decision of the International Olympic Committee is announced," Mr.
Munro said.

Among the 17 dissidents scheduled for trial is Liu Jingsheng, 38, a former bus
driver who became a vocal campaigner for democracy in 1979 and edited a
short-lived pro-democracy journal, Explorations, with Mr. Wei.

Unlike Mr. Wei, Mr. Liu served only a brief term in 1979. He was arrested again
last June when, according to Asia Watch, Beijing police raided his home and
discovered pro-democracy leaflets.

No Regrets

Reflecting on the years spent in prison, Mr. Wei said he had no regrets, and he
smiled at a question about whether there had been any conditions set for his
release, saying: "You don't know me very well. If there is any precondition, I
would not accept it."

During his imprisonment, much of it spent in solitary confinement, Mr. Wei said
his reading was limited to official propaganda organs of the state, like the
People's Daily and the Legal Daily.

"I know very little about the outside world," he said. But he said he has plans
to read, and observe and catch up for the rest of his life.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Wei Jingsheng, free after 14 1/2 years, met with reporters in
Beijing. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A1); Wei Jingsheng, right, the
longest-serving pro-democracy campaigner in China, at his trial in 1979.
(Gamma-Liaison) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

C. L. Sulzberger, Columnist, Dies at 80

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1851 words


C. L. Sulzberger, a prize-winning foreign correspondent and foreign affairs
columnist for The New York Times for nearly 40 years and the author of two dozen
books, most of them on foreign policy and world leaders in the cold-war era,
died yesterday at his home in Paris. He was 80.

Mr. Sulzberger, who gave up his Op-Ed page column in The Times in 1978 but
continued writing his memoirs and books on foreign affairs, died of natural
causes after a long illness, his family said.

The son of Leo Sulzberger, he was a nephew of Arthur Hays Sulzberger, publisher
of The Times from 1935 to 1961. He was also a first cousin of Arthur Ochs
Sulzberger, publisher of the paper from 1963 to 1992 and still chairman of the
Times Company.

In a career that began in the Great Depression and spanned World War II, the
Korean and Vietnam Wars and the rise and fall of nations, Mr. Sulzberger roamed
the world from his longtime base in Paris to interview historic leaders and to
chronicle and analyze the major events of his time. His columns offered
portraits of leaders and nations, opinions on foreign news and critiques of
American foreign policy.

Career Spanned 5 Decades

After graduation from Harvard and five years with other news organizations, Mr.
Sulzberger joined The Times in 1939 and was its chief foreign correspondent from
1944 to 1954, when he became a columnist. His column, "Foreign Affairs,"
appeared three times a week, on the editorial page until 1970, then on the Op-Ed
page until his retirement in 1978.

Mr. Sulzberger, who was banned from half a dozen countries for his reporting and
won a special Pulitzer Prize citation in 1951, ranged over the field of foreign
affairs, touching on military power, economics, diplomacy, industrial and
agricultural production and especially the ideas and personalities of leaders.

As a reporter and commentator, he had the inestimable gift of a quick study: the
ability to land in the morning in Moscow or Beijing, Prague or Johannesburg,
and, with the benefit of speedy access to top leaders, to write by nightfall a
cogent report giving the impression he had steeped himself in a subject all his
life.

From presidents and Prime Ministers in their inner sanctums to royalty in
palaces and rebels in mountain strongholds, he crisscrossed and circled the
world to talk to and write with insight about Stalin, Nikita S. Khrushchev, Zhou
Enlai, John F. Kennedy, Richard M. Nixon, Winston Churchill, Charles de Gaulle
and many heads of government and state, ambassadors and foreign ministers,
generals and secret agents.

Praise and Criticism

His contacts with the famous and the mighty produced many notable exclusive
articles, and he readily took credit for them. And while he was widely praised
for his ability to uncover news and to comment upon it in a voice of wide
experience and intelligence, some reviewers of his books an academic critics
also said his views were pompous, debatable and laden with trivia.

Moreover, while he frequently challenged policy as formulated in Washington and
other capitals, critics noted in retrospect that his reporting and commentary
often tipped toward the official line of the leaders he covered -- that was,
indeed, a general practice of diplomatic reporting in his era.

And he candidly acknowledged that his entree was enormously eased by his role as
a Times correspondent and columnist, by his connections to the family that owned
the newspaper and especially by the desire of leaders and revolutionaries to get
maximum attention for their views through its widely read columns.

A Message for Kennedy

At times, Mr. Sulzberger had behind-the-scenes roles in the affairs he wrote
about. In "The Last of the Giants," a 1970 book about world leaders he had
covered, he recalled that in a 1961 interview in Moscow, Khrushchev asked him to
take a message to President Kennedy, and he did so. The contents were never
revealed.

Mr. Sulzberger often injected himself into his accounts: "I limped goutily over
to the Elysee -- for an appointment with President Pompidou," Henry Kissinger,
"no slouch in the art of flattery, assured me that both he and the President
thought my column was the best being written," or "I was sitting in the cold
lobby of the Moskva Hotel this morning when John Foster Dulles came along,
nudged me and suggested we go for a walk."

In 1977, Mr. Sulzberger was accused in an article in Rolling Stone magazine of
having had a secret relationship for years with the Central Intelligence Agency.
And a C.I.A. official charged that Mr. Sulzberger's Sept. 13, 1967, column on
the Soviet K.G.B. had been lifted almost verbatim from an agency briefing paper.

There was no question that Mr. Sulzberger had extensive contacts with C.I.A.
station chiefs and agents in many countries. And, it was pointed out, he would
have been extremely useful to the agency with his access to foreign leaders and
his influential voice in the pages of The Times.

The Times, after an extensive investigation, reported that the C.I.A. had
counted a number of American journalists among its paid agents, but denied that
Mr. Sulzberger had been among them. Mr. Sulzberger also denied that he ever
worked for the C.I.A. or that he had used an agency briefing paper as a column.

A Good Listener

A tall, bespectacled man with white hair and a thin smile that captured a blend
of worldly wit and solemnity, Mr. Sulzberger was remembered by colleagues at The
Times as convivial and generous, a raconteur who could be punditical at times
but who also was a good listener and a good friend.

Close acquaintances, too, remembered him as a man who led a double life. There
was a darker side to his personality, one that brooded in diaries about not
having done more in life and that longed for the privacy of a fishing stream in
the Colorado Rockies, where he went each summer, or his villa on the Greek
island of Spetsai.

The darker side was illuminated in a 1980 book by Mr. Sulzberger, "How I
Committed Suicide: A Reverie." In it, he spoke of profound loneliness after the
death of his wife, the former Marina Tatiana Lada, in 1976. They had been
married in 1942 and she had often accompanied him on his journeys and made their
Paris home a salon for the illustrious and the powerful.

'The Keyes of My Prison'

He also wrote of his departure from The Times, under a mandatory retirement
program then in effect, and of the sense that he had outlived his era. And he
declared: "How right Donne was, I thought, when he wrote, 'Mee thinks I have the
keyes of my prison in mine owne hand, and no remedy presents it selfe so soone
to my heart, as mine own sword' -- except it was mine own gun and not my sword."

Cyrus Leo Sulzberger was born in New York City on Oct. 27, 1912, and graduated
magna cum laude from Harvard in 1934. While he wanted to go into journalism and
had close family connections to The Times, he chose to start elsewhere to
establish his name.

He started as a general assignment reporter for The Pittsburgh Press and a year
later went to Washington for the United Press, covering labor, the Treasury
Department and the Federal Reserve system. He later went to Europe and worked
for The London Evening Standard and other newspapers and periodicals in the
United States and Europe.

Joining The Times in 1939 as a young foreign correspondent at the outbreak of
World War II, he traveled 100,000 miles through 30 countries in his first three
years on the job, sending reports from the Balkans, North Africa, Italy, the
Soviet Union, the Middle East and capitals and front lines across a war-torn
Europe.

Arrest and Expulsion

He wrote so many provocative articles about Balkan and Axis politics that he was
successively banned from Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Italy. "A creeping
tarantula, going from country to country, spreading poison," the Italian
propagandist Virginio Gayda wrote of him. In 1941, he was arrested by the
Gestapo in Slovakia and accused of being a British spy; he was later released
without a trial.

As chief correspondent of The Times from 1944 to 1954, he directed the coverage
of the end of the war in Europe with a distinguished group that included Drew
Middleton, Raymond Daniell, Herbert L. Matthews, Clifton Daniel and James
Reston.

After the war, Mr. Sulzberger chronicled the division of Europe into Western and
Communist spheres, analyzed rival guerrilla movements in Yugoslavia and drew out
for readers the complex character of Tito and won a special Pulitzer Prize
citation in 1951 for an exclusive prison-cell interview in Yugoslavia with
Archbishop Alojzije Stepinac, whose 1946 conviction on war-crimes charges
signaled the start of the postwar struggle between church and state in Eastern
Europe.

While he knew many world leaders on a first-name basis, he was perhaps most
intimate with de Gaulle, the French statesman whose career and complex character
filled scores of columns and many chapters of Mr. Sulzberger's books.

Books on Foreign Affairs

Mr. Sulzberger's many books included "The Big Thaw," published in 1956, a
personal exploration of the Soviet Union and its satellite countries in Eastern
Europe under the Khrushchev regime; "What's Wrong With U.S. Foreign Policy," a
1959 critique; "A Long Row of Candles," a 1969 memoir; "The Fall of Eagles," a
1977 volume on the collapse of the Hapsburgs, the Hohenzollerns and the
Romanovs, and "Seven Continents and Forty Years," a 1977 chronicle of Mr.
Sulzberger's career.

Reviewers sometimes criticized Mr. Sulzberger's books for being repetitious, for
injecting the author too much into accounts of conversations with interview
subjects, and for too much trivia in the bulky volumes: what King Paul of Greece
wore, and where Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower bought cheap clothing.

But more typically reviewers praised him for indefatigable reporting, for
courage on dangerous assignments and for what Paul Grimes, reviewing "Seven
Continents and Forty years," called his "sharp succinct portraits" of world
leaders, and he listed a few: "She looks like a simple grandmother but she is
obdurate and hard as nails," (Prime Minister Golda Meir of Israel), and "a
small, pipe-smoking man with an unctuous manner . . . the face of a halibut with
shark's eyes." (Prime Minister Harold Wilson of Britain).

Decline of U.S. Power

Theodore H. White, in a review of "What's Wrong With U.S. Foreign Policy," said
Mr. Sulzberger had documented "in overwhelming and appalling detail," how the
United States had lost power in the postwar years and the 1950's. "Mr.
Sulzberger's unique opportunities as global investigator for The Times are
buttressed by his knowledge of history," Mr. White declared.

Among Mr. Sulzberger's honors were Overseas Press Club awards for the best
consistent reporting from abroad in 1951, and for excellence in reporting and
writing in 1957 and 1970.

He is survived by a son, David Alexis Sulzberger, of London; a daughter, Marina
Sulzberger Berry, of London, and two grandchildren. The family said the funeral
would be private.

NAME: C. L. Sulzberger

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: C. L. Sulzberger (The New York Times, 1972); C. L. Sulzberger,
left, war correspondent, escaping from Greece during the German invasion in
1941.

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Assembly Approves a Charter Creating Monarchy

BYLINE: Reuter

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Tuesday, Sept. 21


By a vote of 113 to 5 with 2 abstentions, Cambodia's National Assembly adopted a
new Constitution that will make Prince Norodom Sihanouk the King, a Government
spokesman told reporters.

Prince Sihanouk, who is now in Beijing undergoing medical treatment, is expected
to return to the Cambodian capital later this week to sign the document.

The signing will formally end the role of the United Nations peacekeeping force
in Cambodia, which is expected to be withdrawn by mid-November.

The new constitution, which has 139 clauses, provides the legal framework for a
political agreement reached last Friday by the country's two major parties.

Under the agreement, Prince Ranariddh, Prince Sihanouk's son, will assume the
office of First President, while Hun Sen, leader of the pro-Vietnamese Communist
Party, will become his chief deputy, or Second President.

The 49-year-old Prince Ranariddh has led the royalist party, known as Funcinpec,
since 1989. He served as commander of the group's rebel forces, which fought to
overthrow the Government installed by Vietnam after it invaded Cambodia in 1978.
The Vietnamese invasion led to more than a decade of civil war, which was
formally ended by a 1991 peace treaty.

However, the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group, which dropped out of the peace efforts
last year and boycotted the elections in May, maintains a significant military
force.

The scope of Prince Sihanouk's powers as King in the new Government is still
undetermined.

Prince Sihanouk led Cambodia as its monarch from 1941 to 1955, when he abdicated
in favor of his father to run Cambodia as its civilian leader. He played the
latter role until he was overthrown by a coup in 1970.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. Misunderstood? Willis Makes Himself Clear

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 20


Bruce Willis laughed. "If anyone said this career was going to happen," he said,
"if anyone said I was going to make more money on one picture than anyone in my
county in New Jersey made in their entire lives, if anyone said I'd have people
trying to take pictures of me when I walk outside and wackos following me around
and me living this life, I would have said, 'Hey, you're out of your mind.' "

Mr. Willis's newest film, "Striking Distance," is No. 1 at the box office this
week, a testament to the movie star's drawing power, and certainly not to the
reviews, which were modest at best. But Mr. Willis, 38, accepts the film, his
overall success and his stardom as if he finds it all a little hard to believe.

"If you can find out why this film or any film does any good, I'll give you all
the money I have," he said in an interview this morning. "No one knows. You see
dogs, idiotic films, make $150 million. And you see terrific films that die.
Nobody knows the answer. Maybe it's because people like me are in these kinds of
films."

'Not a Devious Man'

Unusually blunt, even by Hollywood standards, Mr. Willis is engaging, shrewd and
rich enough not to mind where the chips fall. He rarely gives interviews
because, he said, the news media have misrepresented and misquoted him and
treated him badly. His feistiness and toughness, he implied, can be misconstrued
as throwing his weight around.

Mr. Willis knows that "Striking Distance" may founder over the next few weeks,
but he shrugs that possibility off. "I'm not a devious man," he said in another
interview, late on a recent night, seated in a deserted hotel lobby in Santa
Monica during a break in the making of a new film, "Color of Night."

"I don't cheat, lie or go out of my way to mess people over, but I'm still
amazed at the venal garbage that goes on in this town," he said. "People lie
about you. People want to see you fail. It's so competitive here, you can see
how much people want to see you fail."

Why is there so much venality here?

"If you figure it out, call me," the actor said.

Mr. Willis has the reputation of having a volatile temperament, and he has had
his share of failures, notably "Hudson Hawk," the big-budget 1991
action-adventure that was savaged by the critics and seemed, at the time, to be
a metaphor for overindulgence. ("Did it hurt me?" he said with a shrug. "It's in
profit. Nobody's interested in that.")

The movies for which Mr. Willis is best known are the two hugely successful "Die
Hard" films. Yet what has separated him from other action-movie stars, like
Arnold Schwarzenegger or Sylvester Stallone, is not so much the types of films
he has appeared in, but an ironic style, a working-class persona and his New
York theatrical background, which still makes him hunger for other sorts of
parts.

Mr. Willis seems torn between the big-bucks roles that have made him a star and
more serious parts, which are riskier, less visible and have thus far garnered
him little critical acclaim.

He played a haunted Vietnam veteran in the 1989 film "In Country," and he was
the voice of the wisecracking baby in "Look Who's Talking," and its sequel. He
spoofed himself in "The Player," played a meek, bespectacled physician in "Death
Becomes Her," was a gangster in "Billy Bathgate" and appeared as a tabloid
reporter in the disastrous "Bonfire of the Vanities."

In "Striking Distance," a Columbia movie, he plays a Pittsburgh policeman on
river-rescue patrol duty, in search of a serial killer. For Mr. Willis, who can
earn at least $10 million for an action movie, the role is hardly a stretch. In
"Color of Night," an erotic thriller made by Hollywood Pictures, he plays a New
York psychologist who is traumatized by the suicide of a patient. His next movie
will be Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction," in which he is to portray a
down-and-out boxer. After that, Mr. Willis is planning a long break, perhaps a
year.

"If you're a so-called movie star, there's no catching-up time," he said.
"You're just on this fast-moving freeway and you can't take the side roads and
examine your choices and where you've been and what you're doing."

His wife, Demi Moore, is expecting their third child in the spring. He talks of
returning to New York to appear on the stage. He has read several plays, he
said, but he won't discuss them, saying he has not made up his mind about them.

Mr. Willis plainly misses New York. He grew up in Penns Grove, N.J., in Salem
County, near the Delaware line; worked after high school at the nearby Dupont
chemical plant, like his father, and then quit to study acting at Montclair
State.

"I had what alcoholics call 'a moment of clarity,' " he recalled. "I looked at
those guys working in the plant, walking in the same steps every day, and I
said, 'Not me.' As soon as I began acting in college, I felt blessed. I found a
home."

'Moonlighting' Strikes

The star is known, of course, as the New York actor who was plucked out of
anonymity and selected from 3,000 contenders to star as David Addison in the
television series "Moonlighting." Before that, he was an increasingly successful
Off Broadway actor who also worked as a waiter and bartender.

"I lived for seven years in the same place, a fifth-floor walk-up on 49th,
between Ninth and 10th," Mr. Willis said.

"Now I have an apartment in New York that I can almost see my old apartment
from," he continued. "It's about a mile and a quarter and many light-years
away."

"There's more confidence in New York than here," he said. "This town is
fear-driven. Now you have accountants, lawyers and agents running studios and
what we do, that mysterious thing called performance, is something the guys
writing the checks can't grasp. In another place, if you gamble with 60 or 90
million dollars and you fail, there are dire consequences. You lose your job.
You get run out of town. Here, I've seen whole regimes drummed out of studios,
people say they don't know what they're doing, and then they show up at another
studio. There's a tremendous amount of upward failure here."

"And some directors," he said, rolling his eyes. "They make grossly negligent
mistakes and a couple of years go by and they're back. It's amazing. Guys who
really shouldn't be in charge of anything are given $30 million to make another
film."

Mr. Willis insists he is not thin-skinned, but like most people in Hollywood,
even the most powerful -- especially the most powerful -- the slightest
criticism seems to grate on him.

"With this whole turmoil about 'Hudson Hawk,' I realized I didn't need to have
people say nice things about me," he said. "It would be great if I got the nice
press that some actors get without trying. But I don't need it. The gift I got
from 'Hudson Hawk' was that I don't expect another good review. You guys get the
last word. I've had writers walk into my trailer, openly hostile, and I asked
them why and they say, 'Because I don't particularly care for you.' So you can't
win."

As he approaches the age of 40, Mr. Willis said, he is convinced that there will
soon be more provocative roles for him. He looks at such actors as Harrison
Ford, Clint Eastwood, Dustin Hoffman, Robert De Niro and Al Pacino as models.

"It's not that way for women," he said. "If I was a woman, I'd do something
different. Look at my wife. She's a phenomenon. Her last four films have done
tremendous business. She's young. She doesn't think about being 50, but I bet
Hollywood does. They're probably already trying to get a 15-year-old to be the
next Demi Moore."

NAME: Bruce Willis

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "If you can find out why this film or any film does any good,"
said Bruce Willis, "I'll give you all the money I have." His latest film,
"Striking Distance," is leading at the box office this week. (Albert
Ferreira/DMI)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Refugees Enrich Our National Life

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 319 words



To the Editor:

In "Immigrants: A Cost or a Benefit?" (Op-Ed, Sept. 3), Donald L. Huddle states
that most refugees are low-skilled and dependent. Our experience does not bear
that out.

Last year, 79 percent of the "free case" refugees (those without family members
in the United States) resettled through our organization were employed within
their first six months in this country. While we do not have precise statistics
beyond six months, we estimate that the employment rate of refugees by the end
of their second year in the United States approaches that of the nation at
large. Hardly a record of dependency.

Our experience is that most refugees are highly motivated, energetic people,
grateful to the United States for the opportunity of a fresh start free from
persecution.

As for skills, some refugees are highly skilled, others not. This is not
necessarily an indication of the refugee's prospects for success or his or her
future contribution to our society.

Consider Thanh Truong. At 18 he escaped forced labor in Communist Vietnam, where
he had been involved in a youth gang. After a perilous voyage at sea in an
overcrowded boat, during which his cousin drowned, Mr. Truong languished for
months in a refugee camp in Thailand before being resettled through our
organization in Minnesota.

Now 31 years old, Mr. Truong is a professor of chemistry at the University of
Utah. He has just been named one of the best young chemists in the United
States. He has received the National Science Foundation's Young Investigator
Award in Chemistry, a $500,000 research grant. The National Science Foundation
cited his research as central to treatments for cancer and other genetic
diseases. "I have two lives," Mr. Truong says. "Thankfully, this is my second
life."

RALSTON H. DEFFENBAUGH JR.
Executive Director, Lutheran
Immigration and Refugee Service
New York, Sept. 10, 1993

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Fudging Health Care Costs

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


In the mid-1960's Lyndon Johnson tried to hide the true costs of the Vietnam War
from Congress and the American people. He was pushing his Great Society programs
and felt that if Congress knew how expensive the war was becoming it would say,
in effect, "Mr. President, you can't have both."

And the President knew that instead of financing the Great Society, Congress
would choose to finance the war.

So Lyndon Johnson concealed the real numbers, declined to seek a tax increase to
pay for the war, and set the nation on a moral and fiscal course from which we
have yet to recover.

When Richard Nixon ran for President in 1968 he proved to be no more careful
with the truth than Lyndon Johnson. Mr. Nixon claimed to have a secret plan to
end the war. He didn't. The plan was a fantasy, a figment of a cynical
candidate's imagination that was dressed up as fact and sent out to seduce the
electorate.

The war went on until 1975.

In 1980 Ronald Reagan told us the biggest whopper of them all. The wonder is
that anybody believed him. In his warm and agreeable way, he told us that he
would increase military spending, reduce taxes and at the same time,
miraculously, he would demolish the deficit and balance the budget.

Mr. Reagan was wildly popular. It was as if Santa Claus had been elected
President.

Now Bill Clinton, a fast talker who has already made his share of promises he's
been unable to keep, is making his pitch to Congress and the public on health
care reform.

The smart money suggests that truth is about to take another shellacking.

With Ronald Reagan's communications director at his elbow, President Clinton
claims his plan will bring health care costs under control; will cover every
legal resident of the U.S. (including 37 million people who currently have no
insurance); will not require a major tax increase, and, incredibly, will
generate an extra $91 billion to reduce the budget deficit.

The President insists this will all be accomplished without reducing the quality
of medical care.

Enter Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who will try to
guide aspects of Mr. Clinton's plan through the Senate Finance Committee. On the
NBC News program "Meet the Press," Senator Moynihan said the Administration's
claim that it would reap $91 billion in deficit reduction from health care
reform was a "fantasy."

And he said the Administration would not get the $238 billion in savings from
Medicare and Medicaid that it is planning on. "That's not going to happen," said
the Senator.

He suggested that candor would be the Administration's best approach, asserting,
"We must not pretend that this is going to be free."

Presidents apparently assume that Americans are incapable of digesting bitter
truths. The truth about health care is that major reform cannot be achieved
easily or cheaply. There will be pain and sacrifice or there won't be health
care reform.

The President has an obligation to be clear about that. There are many benefits
to be realized from Mr. Clinton's plan. But it is a proposal that could affect
up to one-seventh of the nation's economy. Anything that large has to have some
down sides.

Under the plan a significant number of jobs will likely be lost. Many people
with good health insurance will pay more and get less coverage. Some health care
is likely to be rationed. And it is possible that health care reform could end
up adding to the budget deficit.

The President and Hillary Rodham Clinton are now focused on the huge task of
selling the health care proposal. The President will give his television address
tonight. Tomorrow the Cabinet and other top officials will carry the sales
campaign to all 50 states.

Usually in such a campaign the product's benefits are emphasized and its
drawbacks or defects are given short shrift. It's the way you sell soap, and
cars, and iced tea. It's also the way Lyndon Johnson tried to sell his war and
Ronald Reagan sold his economic plan.

It's not the way you want to sell health care reform. The nation deserves a
serious and candid discussion of this enormous proposal. And it deserves to hear
the truth from its President.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

North Is Entering G.O.P. Senate Race in Virginia

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Oliver L. North has made it official: He will run next year for a Senate seat in
Virginia.

For months he has been acting like a candidate, spending four or five days a
week on the road in Virginia, preaching his hard-right brand of patriotic
conservatism, raising money and exploring his chances of winning the Republican
senatorial nomination.

Then 10 days ago, satisfied he could make a good run, he quietly filed documents
with the Federal Election Commission in which he officially stated he would be a
candidate, seeking the seat held by Senator Charles S. Robb, a first-term
Democrat. Word of the filing began to circulate this week.

Best known as a decorated Marine Corps lieutenant colonel and Vietnam War
veteran who was involved in the Iran-contra scandal, Mr. North is seen by
Virginia political experts as the favorite in the race for the Republican
nomination and as a formidable contender in the general election.

In part this is because his brand of conservatism plays well in Virginia, a
state in which there is not much ideological or numerical difference among
Republicans, Democrats and independents. But it is also because he is one of the
best fund-raisers in politics today, and Virginia is one of those rapidly
urbanizing states where the costs of running for public office are surging.

As a National Security Council aide to the Reagan White House, Mr. North helped
shape the illegal arms-for-hostages deals with Iran in 1986 and was eventually
convicted of obstructing Congress, destroying official documents and accepting
an illegal gift. But in the end, the charges were overturned and dismissed.

In the Republican nominating contest, Mr. North will face James C. Miller, known
mainly as a budget director in the Reagan Administration. Jay B. Stephens, a
former Federal prosecutor who is little known in the state, is considering
whether to get into the contest.

On the Democratic side, Senator Robb already is running for re-election and
faces a nomination challenge from Gov. L. Douglas Wilder. Under Virginia law,
Mr. Wilder cannot seek a second consecutive term.

Mr. North will not go through the formality of announcing his candidacy to the
public until after the state's Nov. 2 gubernatorial election. "He doesn't want
to get in the way of that race," said Mark Merritt, his top aide.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA;
Du Pont Account Goes to Saatchi

BYLINE: By Stuart Elliott

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 209 words


E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &
Saatchi Advertising in New York and Rochester to handle its American corporate
image account, which had been at BBDO Worldwide in New York for the last 51
years. While billings have been estimated at $10 million, Saatchi estimated that
they would grow to $15 million.

Saatchi's Rochester office, which already handles Du Pont accounts like American
agricultural and chemical advertising, teamed with its New York office for the
two-month review, which was narrowed to BBDO, Saatchi and another core Du Pont
agency, Young & Rubicam in New York.

The review had surprised the advertising industry because BBDO's work won many
awards. The corporate image campaigns for Du Pont -- which included a warmly
emotional television commercial that featured a Vietnam War veteran whose
artifical legs enabled him to play a tough game of playground basketball -- were
well known.

Jamie Murray, Du Pont's manager of corporate advertising worldwide in
Wilmington, Del., said that while the company was pleased with BBDO's creative
output, from a strategic standpoint, "Saatchi truly turned us on." BBDO
continues to handle Du Pont accounts like Stainmaster carpet fibers.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 24, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Two Writers Revisit the City Of Promise

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2072 words


"NEW YORK," F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote in "The Crack-Up," "had all the
iridescence of the beginning of the world." Though it would eventually
disappoint him, though it would later become linked in his memory with "Bacchic
diversions" and "frayed nerves," the "tall white city" whispered to him on first
meeting -- not unlike Daisy Buchanan in "The Great Gatsby" -- "of fantastic
success and eternal youth." In 1920, the city was still wrapped in its cloak of
"mystery and promise," and it promised him everything he had ever wanted:
success and glory and the realization that all his dreams, however evanescent,
were within a fingertip's reach.

Since then, in each generation, similar dreams have drawn writers to New York
City, among them Willie Morris and Dan Wakefield, the authors of two recent
memoirs about the city. Like Fitzgerald, both Mr. Morris and Mr. Wakefield
migrated to Manhattan from the provinces: Mr. Morris from Mississippi via Texas,
Mr. Wakefield from Indianapolis. Like Fitzgerald, both men joined the literary
racket: Mr. Morris as the editor in chief of Harper's Magazine; Mr. Wakefield as
a freelance journalist. And like Fitzgerald, both of them discovered in
Manhattan an impossibly exciting world of art and society and adventure.

While Mr. Wakefield's affectionate memoir, "New York in the 50's" (Houghton
Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence, $11.95 in paperback), deals with the decade of Ike and
Kerouac and Joe McCarthy, Mr. Morris's discursive autobiography, "New York Days"
(Little, Brown, $24.95), deals with the decade of Vietnam and the
assassinations. The music playing in the background of Mr. Wakefield's book is
jazz; the music in Mr. Morris's book belongs to the Beatles.

In "New York in the 50's," everyone is dreaming of writing a novel: "Some of us
did, with greater or lesser degrees of success," Mr. Wakefield remembers, "and
almost all of us tried at some point." In "New York Days," everyone is trying to
write that special magazine piece that will capture the hum and throb of the
nation, its social and political pulse.

Some of the same friends and colleagues turn up in both books -- William Styron,
Norman Podhoretz and the ubiquitous Norman Mailer -- but Mr. Morris's New York
of the 60's tends to be a racier, more glamorous place, more public in its
gestures, less introspective in its passions. Mr. Wakefield recalls going to a
soiree to listen to Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre. Mr. Morris recalls
attending parties with Lauren Bacall, Edward M. Kennedy and Shirley MacLaine.

Mr. Wakefield's home turf was Greenwich Village, a neighborhood that "suggested
creation rather than commerce," a "haven where people were not only allowed but
expected to dress, speak and behave differently from the herd." Mr. Morris lived
on the Upper West Side, "a grungy and ravaged and down-at-the-heels
neighborhood" in its pre-yuppie days, "where you could stand on the crowded
street corners any night in the welter of tongues and watch people of every race
and color drift by."

In the 50's, Mr. Wakefield recalls, writers liked to congregate at the White
Horse Tavern on Hudson Street, a famous old bar where Dylan Thomas had his last
drink. Another favorite hangout was Chumley's on Bedford Street, where "Village
denizens drank and ate at wooden tables surrounded by a frieze of faded dust
jackets on the walls, from books by the writers who frequented the place in the
20's and 30's."

By the time Mr. Morris was at Harper's, in the mid-60's, the literary world had
begun to migrate uptown.  Elaine's, on Second Avenue at 88th Street, was already
on its way to becoming the "clubhouse" for a new generation of writers in search
of conversation and companionship and maybe a free meal, he recalls. "New York
then seemed much like an enormous semiprivate club," he writes, "and this was
the clubhouse, the small town in the throbbing metropolis, the urban enclave,
giving one the warmth and togetherness of the small town."

Manhattan as a small town, a navigable neighborhood: this is the image of the
city that both Mr. Morris and Mr. Wakefield cherish, an image of city as a place
where writers and artists and musicians all know one another, a place where one
can rub elbows with the famous and the notorious, while also reconjuring
literary ghosts from the past. The analogy each author draws is to Paris. As Mr.
Morris puts it: "In the 20's Hart Crane wrote of Paris, and except for a detail
or two it could have been my 60's New York: 'Dinners, soirees, erratic
millionaires, painters, translations, lobsters, absinthe, music, promenades,
oysters, Sapphic heiresses, editors, books. . . . And how!' "

For both Mr. Morris and Mr. Wakefield, as well as Fitzgerald, the sojourn in New
York would eventually come to an end: Mr. Morris left Manhattan in 1971, after
resigning from Harper's over a dispute with the magazine's publisher; Mr.
Wakefield had left in 1962, feeling he needed some sort of change, "a longer,
more permanent respite" from the city's rigors and routines.

Both writers, however, would always reserve a special place in their hearts for
Fitzgerald's "glittering and white" city, and they would write these books to
commemorate the metropolis that had informed and inspired their youths so many
years ago.

Chances to Stroll Along Literary Paths of the Past

Here is a sampling of walking tours that focus on New York City's literary
history:

Today

"THE ROARING TWENTIES," West Village, Manhattan. A tour exploring the lives of
such writers as E. E. Cummings, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Edith Wharton, Hart
Crane, Theodore Dreiser and Sherwood Anderson. Sponsored by Greenwich Village
Literary Tours. Meet at Jefferson Square Library, Sixth Avenue and West 10th
Street, at 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Tomorrow

"WEST SIDE STORIES: A LITERARY WALK," midtown and the Upper West Side. A tour of
sites associated with the many writers who lived and worked in the area.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. Meet in front of the Algonquin Hotel, 59
West 44th Street, at 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

"EDITH WHARTON AND FRIENDS," Greenwich Village. A tour exploring the lives of
writers like Henry James, Stephen Crane, Frank Norris and Mark Twain. Sponsored
by Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 4
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Sunday

"HISTORIC CHELSEA." A tour exploring the lives of such writers as Thomas Wolfe,
Edith Wharton, Jack Kerouac and Dylan Thomas. Sponsored by Greenwich Village
Literary Tours. Meet in front of the Chelsea Hotel, 222 West 23d Street, at 4
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 2

"THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE TO BROOKLYN HEIGHTS." A sunset walking tour across the
bridge and through Brooklyn Heights, focusing on the literary and architectural
history of the area. Stops include the homes and haunts of Walt Whitman, John
Dos Passos, Norman Mailer, Truman Capote, Arthur Miller, Thomas Wolfe and
others. Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. 5 P.M. Fee: $9; $7 students and
the elderly. Information: (212) 439-1090.

Oct. 6

"HISTORIC CHELSEA." A tour exploring the lives of such writers as Thomas Wolfe,
Edith Wharton, Jack Kerouac and Dylan Thomas. Sponsored by Greenwich Village
Literary Tours. Meet in front of the Chelsea Hotel, 222 West 23d Street, at 2
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 9

"RADICAL TEENS," West Village. A tour exploring the lives of such writers and
political activists as Emma Goldman, John Reed and Eugene O'Neill. Sponsored by
Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the corner of Greenwich Avenue and
West 12th Street at 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 10

"A WRITER'S WALK THROUGH GREENWICH VILLAGE." A tour of writers' homes and
gathering places, along with some of the sites made famous in their work.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 2
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

"EDITH WHARTON AND FRIENDS," Greenwich Village. A tour exploring the lives of
writers like Henry James, Stephen Crane, Frank Norris and Mark Twain. Sponsored
by Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 4
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 13

"THE ROARING TWENTIES," West Village. A tour exploring the lives of such writers
as E. E. Cummings, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Edith Wharton, Hart Crane, Theodore
Dreiser and Sherwood Anderson. Sponsored by Greenwich Village Literary Tours.
Meet at Jefferson Square Library, Sixth Avenue and West 10th Street, at 2 P.M.
Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 16

"THE ROARING TWENTIES," West Village. A tour exploring the lives of such writers
as E. E. Cummings, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Edith Wharton, Hart Crane, Theodore
Dreiser and Sherwood Anderson. Sponsored by Greenwich Village Literary Tours.
Meet at Jefferson Square Library, Sixth Avenue and West 10th Street, at 2 P.M.
Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 17

"WRITERS AND REFORMERS: LITERARY CIVIL SERVANTS," Gramercy Park. A tour
exploring the lives of Herman Melville, Washington Irving and other writers of
the neighborhood who also happened to be civil servants. Sponsored by the 92d
Street Y. 11 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. Fee: $15. Information: (212) 996-1100.

"A WRITER'S WALK THROUGH GREENWICH VILLAGE." A tour of writers' homes and
gathering places, along with some of the sites made famous in their work.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 2
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

"HARLEM TOUR." A tour exploring the lives of Langston Hughes, Malcolm X and
other literary and political figures. Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours. Meet
in front of 306 Lenox Avenue, at 125th Street, at 3 P.M. Fee: $6. Information:
(718) 492-0069.

"EDITH WHARTON AND FRIENDS," Greenwich Village. A tour exploring the lives of
such writers as Henry James, Stephen Crane, Frank Norris and Mark Twain.
Sponsored by Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the arch in Washington
Square at 4 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 20

"RADICAL TEENS," West Village. A tour exploring the lives of such writers and
political activists as Emma Goldman, John Reed and Eugene O'Neill. Sponsored by
Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the corner of Greenwich Avenue and
West 12th Street at 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 23

"A WRITER'S WALK THROUGH GREENWICH VILLAGE." A tour of writers' homes and
gathering places, along with some of the sites made famous in their work.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 2
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

"EDITH WHARTON AND FRIENDS," Greenwich Village. A tour exploring the lives of
writers like Henry James, Stephen Crane, Frank Norris and Mark Twain. Sponsored
by Greenwich Village Literary Tours. Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 3
P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Oct. 24

"LITERARY LOWER EAST SIDE." An exploration of Jewish immigrant life in the
neighborhood, with on-site readings of the work of Henry Roth and other authors
and poets. Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 to 4 P.M. Fee: $15. Information:
(212) 996-1100.

"THE ROARING TWENTIES," West Village. A tour exploring the lives of such writers
as E. E. Cummings, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Edith Wharton, Hart Crane, Theodore
Dreiser and Sherwood Anderson. Sponsored by Greenwich Village Literary Tours.
Meet at Jefferson Square Library, Sixth Avenue and West 10th Street, at 2 P.M.
Fee: $10. Information: (212) 924-0239.

Nov. 13

"GREENWICH VILLAGE I," Manhattan. A tour exploring the lives of E. E. Cummings,
John Dos Passos, John Reed and other literary and political figures of the
neighborhood. Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours. Meet under the arch in
Washington Square Park at 1 P.M. Fee: $6. Information: (718) 492-0069.

Dec. 12

"GREENWICH VILLAGE II." A tour exploring the lives of Theodore Dreiser, Edna St.
Vincent Millay, Thomas Paine and other literary and political figures. Sponsored
by Radical Walking Tours. Meet in front of Village Cigars, 110 Seventh Avenue
South, at Sheridan Square, at 1 P.M. Fee: $6. Information: (718) 492-0069.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: White Horse Tavern on Hudson Street in Greenwich Village, a
popular watering hole for writers in the 50's. (Fred W. McDarrah) (pg. C32)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Again Becomes King and Picks Government

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sept. 24


Norodom Sihanouk, one of the century's most resilient political survivors,
became King of Cambodia for the second time in half a century today, fulfilling
a decadelong struggle to return to power.

In his first act as King, Sihanouk named his son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, as
First Prime Minister of a new Government. He also named Hun Sen, who had led the
Vietnam-installed Government and whose party placed second in United
Nations-sponsored elections, as Second Prime Minister.

The United States immediately recognized the new Government in a letter to King
Sihanouk, expressing Washington's desire to establish formal diplomatic ties
promptly.

King Sihanouk's return to the throne and the formation of a new Government were
part of a United Nations-mediated accord that ended 10 years of civil war in
Cambodia and provided for national elections in May. The new 120-member National
Assembly this week voted approval of a new Constitution that provided for a
return of Sihanouk as King. The scope of his powers has not yet been determined.


Constitution Ratified

The King ratified the Constitution today in an elaborate ceremony in the
yellow-turreted royal palace as thousands of Cambodians waved flags and
portraits of him on the grounds outside.

The ceremony returned King Sihanouk to power 23 years after he was overthrown,
while on a trip to Moscow, in a rightist coup. He returned to nominal power
briefly under the Khmer Rouge Government, which was responsible for hundreds of
thousands of deaths, including many members of the royal family, during a reign
of terror in the late 1970's. An invasion by Vietnam removed the Khmer Rouge
from power, but a decade of civil war followed, finally leading to the agreement
that resulted in the May elections.

"To receive this noble result, the Cambodian nation had to face great
difficulties," the King said after the ceremony. "Cambodian people have suffered
a lot for liberal democracy. From now on the Cambodian people are masters of
their own destiny."

"There remains only one problem, the problem of the Khmer Rouge," he told
journalists. "We will do our best to try to resolve that problem militarily or
peacefully."

Khmer Rouge Talks Due

Although the Khmer Rouge were a party to the 1991 agreement that called for a
cease-fire and elections, the Marxist group boycotted the elections, and their
guerrillas have continued to attack Government troops in the countryside. King
Sihanouk is to hold talks with Khmer Rouge leaders in November in an effort for
a settlement.

Just hours before Sihanouk appointed the country's new leaders, the Khmer Rouge
issued a statement protesting against giving Mr. Hun Sen so much power.

"If the two-headed government is to be maintained, will our nation and people
enjoy peace?" the Khmer Rouge said. "Will our nation and people stand idle and
accept to die, or will they struggle for their survival? This is indeed a matter
of life and death for our nation and people."

Sihanouk was elected Cambodia's King in 1941 when the country was a French
colony. He was a virtual prisoner during the Japanese occupation, and he
abdicated in 1955 in favor of his father, Norodom Suramarit, taking the title
Prince and retaining the post of Prime Minister. On King Suramarit's death in
1960, Sihanouk again resumed the role of chief of state but not as King.

A Colorful Ceremony

The ceremony restoring him as King today was held in a chandelier-lit palace
hall that he approached on a red carpet while an aide carried a large golden
parasol to shield the 70-year-old Sihanouk from the tropical sun. He inspected
an honor guard of soldiers as a marching band in crisp whites played a royal
hymn.

The members of the National Assembly sat in rows of golden chairs set before the
throne. They knelt as Sihanouk passed wearing the traditional royal attire of
long-sleeved, gold-buttoned white top, and purple knee-length silk pants over
black stockings.

Sihanouk lit a candle and incense before the throne and then placed the candles
atop two roasted pigs, which had been set beside the throne with grapes, apples
and other offerings.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The throne was the same and so was the occupant. Only the time
has changed. In 1953, during his first reign, King Sihanouk spoke to reporters.
In Phnom Penh yesterday, he smiled after his coronation. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

60's Radical Who Surrendered Pleads Guilty to a Burglary Charge

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 24


Katherine Ann Power, who surrendered last week on charges stemming from a 1970
bank robbery that left a police officer dead, pleaded guilty today to a Federal
charge in an earlier burglary.

Ms. Power, 44, entered the plea in Federal District Court to one charge of theft
of Government property in connection with a burglary at the National Guard
Armory in Newburyport.

Ms. Power, a Vietnam War-era radical who had been one of the nation's
longest-sought fugitives, had pleaded not guilty before a Federal magistrate
Sept. 15 because magistrates cannot accept guilty pleas.

Earlier that day, she had pleaded guilty in state court to two counts of bank
robbery and one count of manslaughter in the killing of Officer Walter Schroeder
Sr., 42. Ms. Power drove a getaway car.

In the Newburyport case, Assistant United States Attorney Brian Kelly said Ms.
Power and several accomplices stole a pickup truck, military radios, 400 rounds
of ammunition and devices for setting off explosives. The accomplices were
caught and convicted long ago.

5-Year Term Recommended

Ms. Power told the authorities that the military equipment was going to be
delivered to the Black Panthers, Mr. Kelly said.

In exchange for the guilty plea, the Government said it would recommend a
five-year prison term to run concurrently with the sentence she receives on Oct.
5 on the state charges. The Federal charge carries a maximum penalty of 10 years
in prison and a $10,000 fine.

The Government also agreed to dismiss Federal bank robbery charges from a holdup
in Philadelphia several weeks before the Newburyport robbery.

Sentencing in Federal court was scheduled for Nov. 24.

After the hearing today, Ms. Power's lawyer, Rikki Klieman, said her client's
anti-war motives should be considered in the sentencing.

"Katherine Power did not act in a vacuum," she said, although she added, "the
Vietnam War and the protests do not excuse what she did."

For years Ms. Power lived in Oregon under the name Alice Metzinger. She married,
raised a child and ran a restaurant. When she came forward last week, she said
she wanted to face her past.

Ms. Klieman said her client had no regrets about surrendering to face the
charges.

"I think she is at peace," Ms. Klieman said.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Julian Semyonov, A Prolific Novelist And Scenarist, 61

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


Julian Semyonov, a prolific Russian author of spy novels and thrillers whose
crime fiction often portrayed the dark side of Russian life, died in the Kremlin
Hospital in Moscow on Sept. 14. He was 61 years old.

The cause was a heart attack, although he had been incapacitated for several
years as the result of a stroke, said John Calder, president of Riverrun Press
in England.

The author of some 50 books and dozens of screenplays, Mr. Semyonov sold
millions of copies of his books in Russia. And starting with "Petrovka 38," a
1965 police thriller, many of his works were published abroad.

Mr. Semyonov, a past president of the International Association of Crime
Writers, spoke Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, English, Spanish, German and
French.

Was a Language Teacher

He was born on Oct. 8, 1931, in Moscow, where his father was a secretary to the
Bolshevik leader Nikolai Bukharin. A graduate of the Oriental Institute of
Moscow University, Mr. Semyonov taught Oriental languages on the university
level and later became a journalist.

As a political writer and reporter for Pravda, he was regarded as a Russian
liberal and internationalist, and among other stories covered the war in
Vietnam, from the North Vietnamese side, while continuing to write crime
fiction.

Mr. Semyonov, who was a friend of the Soviet leaders Yuri V. Andropov and
Mikhail Gorbachev, was accused of being an officer of the K.G.B. by Soviet
emigres during an American book tour in 1987. He denied it, but said that he had
been given access to K.G.B. files by Mr. Andropov so that his spy novels might
be more accurate.

He is survived by two married daughters, Olga, an artist, and Dunya, an actress,
both of whom live in Moscow.

NAME: Julian Semyonov

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Religion Notes

BYLINE: By Ari L. Goldman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 857 words



Hunger Relief as Atonement

Jews who are fasting today in observance of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement,
are being urged to give the money they would have spent on food to the poor
instead. The appeal comes from Mazon, a nationwide Jewish group working to
relieve hunger.

"Yom Kippur is a time for prayers and sermons, fasting and true teshuva
--sincere repentance," the organization's chairman, Rabbi Mark G. Loeb of
Baltimore, said in making the group's appeal. "It is also a time to provide for
those whom Isaiah called 'the hungry and the wretched poor.'

"We ask that you give to Mazon the dollars that would have been spent for food
on this blessed day of voluntary fasting to help feed those in our communities
whose involuntary fast knows no end."

Five hundred rabbis across the nation have agreed to read the appeal in
synagogues and temples today.

The Yom Kippur appeal is one of three major efforts run by Mazon, which takes
its name from the Hebrew word for food. The organization asks that those
celebrating weddings, bar mitzvahs or other joyous occasions voluntarily donate
3 percent of the catering cost to the poor. And on Passover, the springtime
holiday that commemorates the exodus of the Jews from ancient Egypt, it asks
that the cost of an added meal at the seder, the holiday meal and liturgy, be
donated.

Since it was founded eight years ago, Mazon has raised $6 million, which it has
distributed to organizations that fight hunger. Its latest major grant was
$500,000 to the Jewish community of Sarajevo for food, medicine and firewood.

When it comes to deciding how much they would have spent on food on Yom Kippur,
donors to the special appeal tend to think of a nice restaurant rather than fast
food. According to Irving Cramer, Mazon's executive director, the average gift
to the Yom Kippur appeal is $36.

Taxes, Abortions and Health

If the final version of the national health care package President Clinton
outlined this week includes coverage for abortion, at least one Roman Catholic
bishop will refuse to pay his Federal taxes.

"It's a matter of conscience," said Bishop Victor H. Balke of the Diocese of
Crookston, Minn. "It's the taking of human life, and I'm not going to pay the
Government any money to pay for the taking of a human life."

To those liberals who disagree, Bishop Balke likes to remind them that two
decades ago, as a seminary rector, he withheld his taxes to protest the United
States' involvement in Vietnam.

His actions, he argues, are consistent. In Vietnam, he said, he was protesting
the killing of Americans and Vietnamese "in what I thought was an immoral war."
In the case of tax money paying for abortion, he said, the issue is "defending
the lives of unborn children."

" 'Thou shalt not kill' is still the law of God even if it is no longer, in the
case of the unborn, the law of the land," he said.

In a column in his diocesan newspaper, Bishop Balke also urged the 42,000
Catholics in his diocese to consider withholding their taxes.

The United States Catholic Conference, the national body of bishops of which
Bishop Balke is a member, embraced many aspects of the Clinton health plan,
"particularly in its commitment to universal access," but made clear its
opposition to covering abortion, calling its inclusion in the plan "a tragic
step backward."

When asked if the idea of a tax revolt could spread, a spokesman for the bishops
said he did not think it would come to that. "Our hope and our instinct is that
there is enough opposition" to abortion coverage "that it will not be included"
in the final health care plan, said the spokesman, Msgr. Francis J. Maniscalco.

Hindus and 'Aborted Souls'

Christians are not the only religious group struggling with the issue of
abortion. A recent issue of Hinduism Today, a monthly magazine published in
Concord, Calif., deals with the subject in light of Hindu teaching and
tradition.

The magazine cites ancient sacred texts that condemn abortion as a sin, but also
notes that abortion has long been used in India and elsewhere as a form of
population control or, after ultrasound, to insure the birth of a son. The
magazine also notes that many Indian doctors are lulled into specializing in
abortion because of the procedure's financial rewards.

Much of the debate may sound familiar to Christians and Jews who have been over
the same territory in their own communities. But the article adds a new wrinkle
with a discussion of reincarnation, the Hindu belief that the soul of a dead
person continues its spiritual journey on earth by entering another body.

"Rebirth is powerfully interrupted by the abortion process," the magazine says
in an unsigned essay. "It is a bold rejection of the soul's anticipated entry
into earthly life."

The article goes on to recall a Hindu mystic who, with a touch of humor,
compared "the aborted soul" to a stranded traveler. "He must make a new plan,"
the article said, "chart an alternate itinerary, endure untimely delays and
await another flight to his destination, where, he desperately hopes, there will
be a womb for rent!"

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 25, 1993, Saturday

 CORRECTION:
A report in the Religion Notes column on Sept. 25, about a Yom Kippur charity
appeal, misstated the amount of a grant given to the Jewish community of
Sarajevo by Mazon, a Jewish group working to relieve hunger. It was $50,000, not
$500,000.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: September 26, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1445 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  59   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      2   5   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 3      3  24   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 4      5  28   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret presents problems for a young boy.

 5      7   3   THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A
                sequel to "Griffin & Sabine."

 6      4   7   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction
                of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and
                woman and for the woman's first lover.

 7      6   8   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a
                train robber and killer.

 8      8   3   STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems,
                political and sexual, of a Congressman.

 9     11  14   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.)
                The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted
                Cherokee daughter.

 10    10  11   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich
                hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers
                and international terrorists.

 11    13   9   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
                (Dutton, $18.95.) A 1968 novel about the mysterious death of a
                surgeon's daughter.

 12     9   3   THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern.
                (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero,
                including his rebirth in the near future.

 13    15   2   CONSIDER THIS, SENORA, by Harriet Doerr. (Harcourt Brace,
                $21.95.) Four emigres from north of the border try to get
                accustomed to a Mexican village.

 14         2   VIRTUAL LIGHT, by William Gibson. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) A
                scramble in the year 2005 for a pair of virtual-reality
                eyeglasses that disclose secrets.

 15         5   THE SHINING ONES, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.)
                The second volume of a fantasy saga.

 16*       36   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                illustrated cards and letters.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   3   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 2      2  20   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 3      3   6   MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays
                suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected
                ways and places.

 4      6  11   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A
                psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their
                effects on a person's self.

 5      4  59   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 6      5   5   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 7      7  16   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 8      9  41   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

 9     13  16   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley,
                $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher
                and radio commentator.

 10*   12  14   DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf,
                $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.

 11*    8  54   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.

 12*   10  15   THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A
                journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history
                of the 1950's.

 13    11   2   CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A
                reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.

 14    14  11   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House,
                $17.) An account of a young woman's mental illness.

 15    15  32   HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.)
                Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship
                of sickness to thoughts and emotions.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   9   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 2      2  13   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 3      3  19   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.

 4          1   THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The
                basketball coach offers advice on teamwork.

 5*     4   4   FOOD -- YOUR MIRACLE MEDICINE, by Jean Carper. (HarperCollins,
                $25.) Treating illnesses.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 11, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11
lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs. Gallant's
wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious
Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale
examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public
discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is
required, not a victory for church or secularism.
FIDEL CASTRO, by Robert E. Quirk. (Norton, $35.) An indictment, often
devastating, of its ego-driven subject and his works, drawn chiefly from public
materials by orthodox scholarship.
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) The
editorial page editor of The New York Times nobly describes his passionate
fishermanship and the fly-fishing guru who helped him attain it.
HENRY JAMES' MIDNIGHT SONG, by Carol De Chellis Hill. (Poseidon/Simon &
Schuster, $23.) A grand, ebullient novel, set chiefly in 1890's Vienna, where
James, Freud, Jung and Edith Wharton are up to some naughty conduct.
THE MORNING AFTER: Sex, Fear, and Feminism on Campus, by Katie Roiphe. (Little,
Brown, $19.95.) A tough book by a 25-year-old who argues that women are too
brave and too smart to fit the role of eternal victim imposed on them by some
ideologies that expand the meaning of rape.
MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A Reporter's Life, by Malcolm W. Browne. (Times
Books/Random House, $23.) The memoir of a bold foreign correspondent who has
seen 20th-century mayhem from Indochina to the Persian Gulf.
NO OTHER LIFE, by Brian Moore. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A brilliant
meditative novel about a place that is and is not Haiti and a visionary who is
and is not Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's once and future President.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Our War Against Rape, by Linda A. Fairstein. (Morrow, $23.)
Manhattan's chief sex crimes prosecutor explains recent sensible changes in the
law and walks readers through some successful prosecutions.
SILENT PASSENGERS, by Larry Woiwode. (Atheneum, $18.) In Mr. Woiwode's
collection of short stories, events matter less than epiphanies, mystical
networking, usually intrafamilial, between human beings.
A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (Knopf, $21.) Each bad deed leads to a worse one
in this disturbing first novel, a morality tale told by an ordinary man who
became a multiple murderer.
A TIDEWATER MORNING: Three Tales From Youth, by William Styron. (Random House,
$17.) The author's memory plays upon the painful moments of his life at the ages
of 10, 13 and 20; the result is a trio of stories, each of whose sadness is
multiplied by the presence of the others.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


We don't get much adventure fiction from New Zealand, but if Colin D. Peel's
book COVENANT OF THE POPPIES (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95) is
representative of what is going on there, the loss is ours. The writing is lean
and hard, pungent and well organized. Mr. Peel seems to have learned a lot since
"Firestorm" in 1984.

"Covenant of the Poppies" starts in Afghanistan, where Mike McConnell, a British
arms dealer, is faced with conflicting factions. An attempt on his life sends
him back to London, where his wife and son are killed by a booby trap intended
for him. He suspects that the killers were hired by the Joint Afghan Relief
Organization (JARO), a group beyond suspicion in the eyes of the world. Notables
from various countries sit on its board, and they can exert tremendous power.
But McConnell knows that JARO deals in cocaine.

A resourceful guy, he starts to collect evidence against JARO. He is helped by a
Russian woman who has infiltrated the conglomerate. They find that cocaine is
the least of it. A diabolic plot is being hatched.

With all the hectic action, the prose is remarkably contained. McConnell is as
laconic as they come, and the author does not try to put fancy words or long
sentences in his mouth. All the dialogue sounds like real-life speech, and Mr.
Peel avoids adverbitis (would-be descriptive adverbs betray the impotence of so
many writers these days).

Victor Ostrovsky's LION OF JUDAH (St. Martin's, $21.95) is, on the other hand,
full of adverbs: "Arik said reluctantly"; "Natan sighed inwardly"; "Natan
inquired jokingly." And so on. There are cliches: "I swear to you I'll get the
people responsible for this, if it's the last thing I ever do." Mr. Ostrovsky, a
former Israeli intelligence officer who with Claire Hoy wrote "By Way of
Deception," a nonfiction account of Mossad operations, is not the most original
of stylists.

"Lion of Judah" starts in East Berlin with a Stasi colonel fleeing when the wall
comes down and ending up with a new identity in Syria, where he works with
terrorists. Mossad is tipped off. The tipster also says that there is a mole in
the Israeli intel ligence organization. Suspicion falls on an old Mossad hand,
who now has to prove his innocence.

There is nothing much new about the plotting here. Nor is there anything
revelatory about the way Mossad works. Its personnel, as described by Mr.
Ostrovsky, are derived from pulp fiction. Men prove their masculinity with
four-letter words. The author -- surprise! -- is not entirely flattering to
Mossad, and toward the end he raises questions about its ethics.

If Mr. Ostrovsky's scatology sounds forced, the four-letter words in THE VETS,
by Stephen Leather (Pocket Books, $22), seem to fall much more naturally from
the lips of the Vietnam veterans on whom the book centers. It is a rather
peculiar piece of work. Mr. Leather writes well enough, but he is so determined
to get everything in that the action lags. There are just too many flashbacks,
too many travelogue interruptions, too much preaching about the shabby way
America treated its soldiers.

In a way, this is a "Dirty Dozen" kind of story. A former colonel puts together
a team for a daring caper in Hong Kong. Like the colonel, each of the other five
veterans has a necessary specialty. Had "The Vets" been cut by about a third, it
would have made much smoother reading.

MONKEY ON A CHAIN (Doubleday, $20), a first novel by Harlen Campbell, is also
about Vietnam veterans. Here, some 20 years after the end of the war, are four
veterans who made small fortunes wheeling and dealing in Saigon. Something
suddenly happens to break up the arrangement that has prevailed among them since
then.

In this rather complicated story, the hero is a man of few words. "It is what it
is," he says. Or: "He was what he was." Gary Cooper? Alan Ladd? That about sums
up his philosophy. But don't get him mad at you. There is a young woman who was
adopted by one of the original quartet. She desperately wants to learn who her
father is. There is plenty of action, including a final shoot-out, and even a
surprise ending.

Richard Matheson's 7 STEPS TO MIDNIGHT (Forge/Tom Doherty, $22.95) has to do
with a mathematician who makes a wager on the nature of reality with a weird
hitchhiker. The mathematician finds a strange couple in his house who claim to
have lived there for years, discovers that the police are after him, gets caught
in a bizarre mess that takes him to London, Zurich, Venice and elsewhere, is
picked up by a mysterious woman . . . all standard Hitchcock stuff.

The big thing in this kind of suspense novel is how the author will explain it
all. Mr. Matheson, an old hand, offers an explanation as preposterous as the
original events. He somewhat redeems himself at the end with a plot gimmick that
is not so un expected as he seems to think.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Of Guns and Grammar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


To the Editor:

I found G. Gordon Liddy's review of Tom Clancy's novel "Without Remorse" (Aug.
22) highly entertaining, and full of good advice to the aspiring author.

Like the unfortunate Mr. Clancy, I too don't know how a suppressor attaches to a
pistol; I didn't even know that in guns, a clip is different from a magazine.
When I write my novel I will keep this review in mind, and be very careful not
to write carelessly about things I don't know.

But most interesting to me was a particular tidbit of information Mr. Liddy
slipped into his review. "The American left," he tells us, was "supplying
intelligence to the enemy during the Vietnam War." Dear me. I thought that I was
part of "the American left" back then, but for the life of me I can't remember
supplying intelligence to the enemy.

I asked a number of my friends, also part of the American left at the time, and
none of them can remember either. Who in the American left had any intelligence,
at least any of the military variety worth sharing with an enemy? And given that
the great majority of us American lefties can't tell a clip from a magazine, I
can't imagine that any enemy worth its salt would trust our intelligence anyway.

But I must be mistaken. Someone as scrupulous as Mr. Liddy is when it comes to
fine detail certainly wouldn't have made such a grand claim if it wasn't
absolutely true.

DANIEL GARBER
Chicago

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

State Reaches Out to Homeless Veterans

BYLINE: By JULIE MILLER

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 1; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1564 words


WHEN Ernest Parrish of Hartford was an Army medic in Vietnam, one of his jobs
was to pick up his dead comrades and put them into body bags.

He began drinking to wipe the horror of those experiences from his memory and to
alleviate the anxiety of wondering whether he would be alive the next moment.

When Mr. Parrish returned from Vietnam in 1979, he didn't talk about the war.
But his drinking increased. Finally he lost his job and wound up sleeping in
parks and abandoned buildings. Both his marriages ended in divorce.

Today Mr. Parrish is turning his life around. At the state's Department of
Veterans' Affairs home and hospital at Rocky Hill, he is being treated for his
alcohol problem and through the job training program there has earned a
certificate as a nurse's aide. He also plans to take a computer course. "I have
come a long way," Mr. Parrish said. "I was slowly committing suicide."

Over the last several years, greater cooperation between state and Federal
agencies and veterans organizations in Connecticut has resulted in new efforts
to meet the needs of veterans, especially those who served in Vietnam. A program
of vocational, academic and enrichment courses started two years ago at Rocky
Hill has more than 20 offerings, said the commissioner of the state's Veterans'
Affairs Department, Hamilton D. Harper Jr.

Because one of the most serious problems for Vietnam veterans is drug and
alcohol abuse, Mr. Harper said, Rocky Hill also established a rehabilitation
program and offers participants housing.

"This facility for 50 years was the biggest warehouse of human beings north of
New York City," Mr. Harper said. "They were fed well and housed well and well
cared for medically, but no effort was directed to getting them out of here. I
decided this was just a terrible waste of human beings."

Another sign of the increasing attention given to veterans affairs is the second
annual Stand Down for homeless veterans, held recently at Rocky Hill. In
Vietnam, the term stand down meant that a front-line company was being rotated
to a safe place for a respite. A soldier could get a bath, a haircut, a hot
meal, supplies and a medical checkup before returning to battle. Stand Down at
Rocky Hill offers help to veterans battling homelessness, said Robert Getman,
chairman of the event and director of residential and rehabilitation services at
Rocky Hill. All veterans, regardless of when they served or the nature of their
discharge, can attend.

This year about 600 veterans spent one or both days of the event wandering among
the 30 tents set up to provide services like job counseling from the state's
Department of Labor, renewal of a driver's license from the Department of Motor
Vehicles, legal advice, medical and dental checkups and even haircuts. Each
veteran received food, clothing and toilet articles, which were donated by
business and volunteer groups. Twenty-four veterans were admitted to programs at
the hospital, and more are expected to be admitted throughout the year, Mr.
Getman said. Part of Stand Down includes follow-up to put veterans in touch with
the long-term services they need.

'Vets Talking to Vets'

Mr. Parrish was one of 500 veterans who attended the first Stand Down. Just
before this year's event, he walked the streets of Hartford searching for
homeless veterans to sign up for the weekend. "They see the improvement in me
and say maybe this can happen to them," he said. "It's vets talking to vets."

There are an estimated 4,500 homeless veterans in Connecticut, said Mr. Getman.
Many don't have the support of a family; those with dishonorable discharges are
not eligible for veterans benefits. Lawyers and counselors at Stand Down help
veterans help upgrade their discharges.

An Army nurse, Wendy Bellmore, was interviewing veterans lined up for medical
care at one of the tents. When asked what conditions they complained of, Ms.
Bellmore replied: "Just about anything you want to name. Very severe and sincere
mental health problems. They're not getting good community care. Other folks
have no regular medical care."

In another tent, a representative of Connecticut Legal Services, Kathryn
Grusauskas, said veterans asked her about Social Security benefits, child
custody, child support and eviction. In yet another, a Vietnam veteran, Joe
Novotasky of Hartford, was working with the Department of Motor Vehicles to have
his driver's license restored. "It's one step ahead to get my license," Mr.
Novotasky said. "I haven't had one in 20 years."

Adjusting to Civilian Life Is Difficult

It was the nature of the Vietnam conflict that made adjustment to civilian life
so difficult and contributed to the problems suffered by many returning
servicemen, said a representative of the Vietnam Veterans of America
organization, James Tackett. The average age of a World War II soldier was 26,
while the average age for a soldier in Vietnam was 19. Servicemen in World War
II went overseas and returned home in groups, which made it possible for them to
talk with one another after combat.

Vietnam veterans, on the other hand, left for their tours of duty and returned
individually, leaving them less opportunity to discuss their war experiences
with each other, Mr. Tackett said. And, finally, the objectives in World War II
were clearly defined. But in Vietnam, "there were no clear objectives," Mr.
Tacket said. "You would take a hill one day and give it up the next, only to
return three weeks later for a fierce battle on that hill."

In other wars, returning soldiers were heroes, but those who came home from
Vietnam were looked upon as villains, Mr. Harper said, adding: "People
appreciate them now, but a lot of harm was done. Most of the veterans were able
to go on with their lives. But for some, a breakdown in their spirits led to
substance abuse."

Donald Cruz of Guilford, who was 18 when he went to Vietnam as a marine, said he
considers himself fortunate to have had a woman, who has been his wife for 22
years, waiting for him when he came home. "I had some direction," he said.

Mr. Cruz is president of the North Branford chapter of Vietnam Veterans of
America, which was started last year. Having run his own business for more than
20 years, he also wants to become a drug counselor. "There are a lot of vets who
need counseling," he said. "I talked to one who was about to commit suicide.
He's in a program now and he's doing well. I think that inspired me."

Ten years ago, the Government agencies responsible for veterans affairs would
not discuss the problems faced by Vietnam veterans, Mr. Cruz said: "They wanted
to make it go away. Now people are starting to become aware there are problems
much deeper than they wanted to believe."

Mr. Tackett noted that over the years the United States Department of Veterans'
Affairs has learned how to be more responsive to Vietnam veterans, particularly
those with substance abuse problems and post-traumatic stress disorder, a
psychiatric condition often associated with combat duty in Vietnam.

Reaching Out to Homeless Vets

After pressure from veterans organizations, Mr. Getman said, in 1989 the state's
Veterans' Affairs Department began seeking out veterans in shelters and helping
them apply for medical and vocational assistance at Rocky Hill.

"We met with 20 vets the first night in one shelter in Hartford," Mr. Getman
said. "That was a turning point in my life. My eyes were opened to the plight of
the homeless veteran. Only nine were eligible, but that was the beginning of
outreach to homeless vets."

In 1989, of the 260 residents at Rocky Hill, 20 were Vietnam veterans, Mr.
Getman said. "This place had the image of an old soldiers' home," he said."For a
long time, it was a place for chronic alcoholics. We did not get many
applications from younger vets."

By contrast, today 100 of the 390 residents are Vietnam veterans. In addition,
with a $500,000 grant from the state's Department of Social Services, housing is
being purchased for homeless and disabled veterans through the Vietnam Veterans
Assistance Fund, said the fund's president, Linda Schwartz, a retired Air Force
major.

The Veterans' Affairs Department has been trying to find homeless veterans who
are single parents and last year admitted female veterans to programs at Rocky
Hill for the first time. The housing allows women to keep their children with
them while they are in treatment, said Ms. Schwartz. Nineteen women and about a
dozen children attended this year's Stand Down.

Many of the female veterans have been physically abused, and many are struggling
to hold on to their jobs and children, Ms. Schwartz said. Jeannine Wilson, for
example, grew up in a troubled home and joined the Air Force in order to travel
and see the world. She was stationed in Massachusetts and in the Philippines as
an air traffic controller. The 44-year-old woman is divorced and has a
17-year-old son. Medical problems, the loss of her job and the pressure of
supporting herself and her son had left her depressed and suicidal.

The first woman to live at Rocky Hill, Ms. Wilson has undergone therapy and
takes medication to relieve the depression. Her health is improving, and she has
decided to take courses toward a college degree. "I found out that maybe my life
can be nice," she said. "That's something new."

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The flag was raised at second annual Stand Down in Rocky Hill
where services were offered to homeless veterans. (Janet Durrans for The New
York Times) (pg. 1); Michael Corriveau and Carmelo Davino, Vietnam veterans, got
haircuts at Stand Down. (Janet Durrans for The New York Times) (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Every New President Gets a Rematch

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


"BRING them home!" Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia thundered on the
Senate floor the other day, as he pondered aloud the mounting risks facing
American troops hunting down warlords in Mogadishu. "I do not intend for the
Senate just to roll over and play dead to this Administration!"

Well before a rocket-propelled grenade downed a U.S. Blackhawk missle in the
Somali capital Saturday, killing three American soldiers, these words gave
evidence of Congress's increasing restiveness over the Somalia mission in
particular and and foreign affairs in general.

Lawmakers have taken the lead in recent months in pushing the Administration to
suspend nuclear arms testing and to drop military aid for a losing war on
cocaine in the Peruvian Andes. And they threaten the warming trend in relations
with Mexico, with constant attacks on Mexican Government corruption and
repression that could help defeat the North American Free Trade Agreement.

But it is in Somalia and Bosnia where the new Democratic President and the
Democratic Congress are trying to define a new foreign policy while continuing
the almost ritualistic struggle over which one should have the ultimate power to
put American forces in harm's way.

While the Constitution granted Congress the power to declare war, it appointed
the President Commander in Chief. It was left it up to the two branches to work
out the details. That difficult process was played out again last week when
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Defense Secretary Les Aspin and National
Security Adviser Anthony Lake traveled to Capitol Hill for feedback on a
possible peacekeeping mission in Bosnia.

Like Congress, the Administration is deeply split on whether or not to send
troops to Bosnia, and it's quite possible Mr. Clinton would welcome the cover
that a reluctant Congress would provide. Still, the officials faced a barrage
from Congressional leaders who took the opportunity to lay down markers and warn
that Congressional authorization would be difficult to get should the
Administration decide to send troops.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee, told the officials they should win assurances from the warring
parties that they will drop their heavy arms and ease the delivery of relief
supplies -- difficult conditions in a war characterized by fluid battle lines
and loose command controls. Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, chairman of the Armed
Services Committee, publicly warned that they must come up with an exit strategy
before even thinking about deploying troops.

Sparring Branches



 Congressional skepticism over new foreign interventions is likely to be on
display again early this week when the House is expected to pass a resolution
that will force the Administration to put limitations on its goals in Somalia or
face the likelihood of a cutoff of funds. The Senate already approved the
resolution by a 90-7 vote two weeks ago. President Bush won widespread
Congressional support for dispatching troops on a humanitarian mission, but
power brokers like Senators Byrd and Nunn are unhappy that the mission has
changed from feeding to fighting.

Congress has argued with Presidents for more control over foreign policy ever
since Thomas Jefferson, without legislative sanction, dispatched a naval
squadron to the Mediterranean under secret orders to fight the Barbary pirates.
With few exceptions, the legislative branch has lost this continuing turf fight.

But the balance shifted somewhat after Vietnam and Watergate. An emboldened
Congress enacted the War Powers Act over President Nixon's veto, leading to a
trend toward greater Congressional involvement in foreign policy. This led to
the passage of economic sanctions on South Africa over President Reagan's
objections. Congress curtailed and occasionally cut off military aid to the
Nicaraguan contra guerrillas, setting the stage for the Iran-contra scandal,
which underscored the willingness of senior Reagan Administration officials to
circumvent the limits Congress had set on intervention in Central America.

For the most part, Congress deferred to President Bush on foreign affairs,
although the Persian Gulf war resolution of 1991 was viewed as a victory for
legislators demanding a tightening of Congressional controls over war powers
after the unauthorized 1989 invasion of Panama.

Enter Bill Clinton. A foreign policy neophyte, he ran for President promising to
concentrate on domestic policy. He sharply disagreed with Mr. Bush on China and
Haitian immigration, but then reversed himself once elected and adopted stances
similar to those of Mr. Bush.

The President's inexperience and indecisiveness gave Congressional foreign
policy experts an opening. "When you have a President who is new in foreign
affairs and a Secretary of State who is cautious," said Senator Paul Simon of
Illinois, a ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, "Congress fills
the vacuum."

Mr. Simon suggested that Mr. Clinton could eclipse Congress as he gains
experience and luster from presiding over international events like the recent
signing of the peace agreement by the Israelis and Palestinians.

But leading lawmakers predict that the end of the cold war opens new
opportunities for Congress to project its powers overseas no matter who is in
the White House. With the threat of nuclear war reduced, constituents are
demanding that their representatives address issues like trade, drugs and
immigration.

"Increasingly all foreign policy issues are becoming domestic issues," said
Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, a leading Republican on the Foreign Affairs
Committee. "As a reflection of public input, Congress is demanding and playing a
greater role."

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Somali demonstrator ripping apart a U.S. flag in Mogadishu.
(Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Medium is the Message

BYLINE: By Jim Mullen and Hal Rubenstein

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 70; Column 1; Men's Fashions of The Times

LENGTH: 984 words



THE COVER: New York Mets cap THE REVELATION: I'm a native, but I don't know from
the Bronx or Brooklyn. In fact, I'd kill to live in West Palm Beach.



THE COVER: Yankee cap


 THE REVELATION: Who cares about baseball? Navy goes with everything.

THE COVER: Baseball cap, turned round, on: Type A, i.e., model, MTV veejay THE
REVELATION: I'm not hung up on my celebrity and beauty because I know you are.

THE COVER: Type B, i.e., guys over 40


 THE REVELATION: Betcha I'm dope. Betcha can't see the bald spot.

THE COVER: Beret


 THE REVELATION: I wish I were in Paris. I wish I were in Vietnam. I wish I were
anywhere I didn't have to wear this beret.

THE COVER: Earlapped headgear worn with laps down THE REVELATION: My
self-confidence goes with this hat.

THE COVER: Long ponytail


 THE REVELATION: I want to make lots of money, but please don't tell anyone.

THE COVER: Short ponytail


 THE REVELATION: I love making money. I can buy art. THE COVER: "Regular man's
haircut. Not too much off the top." THE REVELATION: My wife buys all my
underwear. Shesmagirl!

THE COVER: Parted down the middle


 THE REVELATION: I'd subscribe to Granta if someone would tell me what it is.

THE COVER: Sides buzzed, top dreaded
THE REVELATION: Don't worry, be happy. Watch me on "Arsenio."



THE COVER: Totally shaved


 THE REVELATION: My options were this or looking like Burt Reynolds.

THE COVER: Mustaches


 THE REVELATION: Everything was better in the old days.

THE COVER: Goatee
THE REVELATION: Why were we in Vietnam, anyway?



THE COVER: Diamond stud earring
THE REVELATION: I got a new Camaro.


 THE COVER: Colored stone earring THE REVELATION: I got an old Camaro.

THE COVER: Thin gold hoop earring


 THE REVELATION: It's not too much, is it? And I take it out when I'm at work.

THE COVER: Thick gold hoop earring
THE REVELATION: They can't fire me.

THE COVER: Two silver hoop earrings, one in each ear THE REVELATION: Freelance.

THE COVER: Small brushed-gold wire-rim glasses
THE REVELATION: Love Charlie Rose.



THE COVER: Aviators


 THE REVELATION: Never miss an issue of Rolling Stone. That Aerosmith cover,
man.

THE COVER: Half-glasses


 THE REVELATION: If these menus weren't printed so damn tiny. THE COVER: Sexual
innuendoes on a T-shirt THE REVELATION: I bought the Rush Limbaugh book. Nah, I
just bought it.

THE COVER: A yellow oxford-cloth shirt


 THE REVELATION: No one will ever guess I got this at a clearance sale.

THE COVER: A loosened tie


 THE REVELATION: Forget the details. Give me the big picture. And who said I'm
cheap?

THE COVER: Three-button suit worn with a knit shirt THE REVELATION: Women like
me because I look sophisticated. I think I can act sophisticated.

THE COVER: $1,700 suit and a button-down white oxford shirt THE REVELATION: Why
didn't I buy in on QVC?

THE COVER: Dark solid-colored suit, thin lapels, tab collar THE REVELATION: You
could eat off the top of my desk, but if you do, you better not make a mess. THE
COVER: Dark double-breasted pin stripe, starched white shirt, red tie THE
REVELATION: If your bank says no, Champion says yes.

THE COVER: All-weather sack suit with "Dale Carnegie" tie (cravat sporting
embroidered animals) THE REVELATION: I can converse with anyone. Even if he
don't want to.

THE COVER: Chalk-striped suit, slicked hair, thin-soled imported loafers THE
REVELATION: I have arrived! Where is everybody?

THE COVER: Navy three-button jacket, teal viscose shirt, cornflower silk tie,
slate pleated pants, midnight suede shoes THE REVELATION: I know it goes
something like this.

THE COVER: Unribbed short-sleeved knit shirt, triple-pleated shorts, fake THE
REVELATION: Topsiders Stop fighting back there! Because I'm the dad, that's why.

THE COVER: Tweed jacket, plaid shirt, knit tie THE REVELATION: Woody used to be
so funny. You see "Bananas?" THE COVER: Brass-buttoned blazer, chinos, $125
running shoes THE REVELATION: I'm an active kinda guy. You gonna eat that?

THE COVER: Putty-colored three-button wool twist suit with a brushed wool shirt
THE REVELATION: Talk business for a minute, and I can still write this off.

THE COVER: Four-button cocoa and stone herringbone suit, anthracite cashmere
crew neck, multi-eyelet boot shoe THE REVELATION: Yeah, I work on Seventh Ave.,
but it's not the real me.

THE COVER: Savile Row nipped-waist worsted suit, blue shirt, white collar,
french cuffs, tie bar, foulard THE REVELATION: I am relaxed.

THE COVER: White T-shirt, blue jeans, $125 basketball sneakers THE REVELATION: I
gotta be my own man. You gonna finish that?

THE COVER: Cardigan sweater, plaid shirt, old corduroy pants. THE REVELATION: My
left knee always tells me when it's going to rain. THE COVER: Cardigan sweater,
no shirt. THE REVELATION: We'll be in Miami for New Year's.

THE COVER: Straw cowboy hat, too-small sweatshirt, slipping jeans with too much
stitching on pockets, gold chain THE REVELATION: You got any Tums?

THE COVER: Studded black motorcycle jacket, black leather vest, silk T-shirt,
white jeans THE REVELATION: No, I've a fire-engine-red Nissan Sentra with dual
cam.

THE COVER: Black leather jacket, no shirt, ripped jeans, chaps, concho belt,
lizard boots THE REVELATION: You should see me on my bike. In fact, you should
only see me on my bike.

THE COVER: Big black shoes


 THE REVELATION: I'm glad everyone is wearing them again. They're so me.

THE COVER: Navy turtleneck, navy blue leather pants, navy blue suede jacket,
navy blue alligator belt, navy blue lizard boots THE REVELATION: It looked like
black! I thought it was black!

THE COVER: Black T-shirt, black jeans, black cowboy hat, black Western boots THE
REVELATION: Hi, I'm Clint Black.

THE COVER: Black all the time
THE REVELATION: Everyone says I'm very talented.


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Who's Bashing Whom?

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


To the Editor:

Thank you for the review of my book "The Power and the Money: Inside The Wall
Street Journal" (Aug. 15). However, I do wish to clarify two statements made by
the reviewer.

I did not "bash" Peter Kann -- Dow Jones's chief executive officer and a onetime
Vietnam correspondent for The Journal -- "for not speaking out against the war
in Vietnam . . . and for not hanging out . . . with the bulls from The New York
Times, Time and The Washington Post." I did quote David Halberstam: "Peter was
unaffected by [the war] because he really never covered Vietnam. . . . I never
heard any members of the primary club of Vietnam correspondents -- Neil Sheehan,
Peter Arnett, Charley Moore or Ward Just -- ever mention Kann's name."

Also, I want to make it clear that it was the reviewer who described Karen
Elliott House's voice as "a cow-country drawl that can sear flesh."

FRANCIS X. DEALY JR.
London

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 10, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A letter to the editor on Sept. 26 from Francis X. Dealy Jr., quoting his book
"The Power and the Money: Inside The Wall Street Journal," misspelled the name
of a correspondent cited in the book as one of the "primary club of Vietnam
correspondents." He was Charles Mohr, not Moore; he covered the Vietnam War for
Time magazine in 1962-63, and for The New York Times from 1964 to 1970.


TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A SENSE OF PLACE

BYLINE: By Barry Kluger;  Barry Kluger, senior vice president of VH-1, lives in
Montville.

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 15; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


I RECEIVED a fax the other day. From my daughter. From her camp. From her bunk.
From her bedside.

Montville is a far cry from the technology wonderland of the Silicon Valley and
some years removed from places where traditions don't die hard, they just roll
over and succumb to progress. The Fourth of July celebration in my town was
little changed much from those I recall from my own Long Island childhood.

But the politics that were once divisive seemed to blur as I watched the parade
go by with my neighbor. There we were, war protester and Vietnam veteran,
watching a bed race and seeing our own children now living in a world were the
cold war is over and the threat of attack a distant worry. Now comes the process
of educating her that there is still war in Bosnia, some governments are corrupt
and hateful and that because the immediate danger to our own daily lives is
absent, now is the best time to learn and grow.

Yet, at 11 years old, my daughter Erica seems miraculously innocent with just a
faint hint of sarcasm. A recent exchange at a local playground helped put a new
perspective on these times. A 7-year-old, exhausting herself and her sisters on
a teeter-totter, ran up to her mother and told her: "We're playing pretend movie
theater -- can we have tape for the VCR?"

Erica has already been to more than 75 movies in her lifetime in a real theater
(all right so it was a 10-plex at the mall), watched planes take off and land at
a local airfield, been to the Bronx Zoo repeatedly, walked in the mud without
shoes, and has even made Silly Putty copies of the Sunday comics. A pioneer
child of the 90's? Hardly. A pure suburban kid untarnished by progress of the
20th century? No way. Then how about a regular preteen who will remain mired in
the past, watching today's hip kids forget the good old days? Not if I can help
it, for this is where the lessons get passed down and she keeps it alive.

It took me eight years to get a VCR, using the excuse that my daughter's high
energy level kept me from sitting uninterrupted through a rented motion picture.
Truthfully, I was reluctant to give up old TV habits. And what do these
confessions have to do with July Fourth? Tradition, of course! No . . . not the
backward adherence to outdated principles of an archaic area; just a longing for
those simpler times before Nintendo, Cuisinarts, Dijon mustard, digital watches,
microwave ovens and battery powered salt and pepper shakers. Somehow, Ping-Pong
was more challenging, Gulden's on a hot dog much tastier, hour and minute hands
more reliable, and food cooked in a conventional oven easier to digest.

Now don't get me wrong. I drive a late model import, fly only jumbo jets, wear
shoes by exotic foreign designers, use an electric razor and love automatic
teller machines. So what's my point? Worried about a generation of kids who
won't know how to walk to school? I was never swayed by my father's
three-miles-through-the-snow and other bad weather routine. No, the only thing
you get by walking to school in the rain is wet. No, for me it's letting my
daughter know that there are movies shown outside the home, and people, not
machines, still build skyscrapers. That you can have just as much fun feeding
ducks as shopping for designer jeans, that planting cucumber seeds in her own
backyard garden rivals swapping "Melrose Place" trading cards with the kid down
the block who sports the name "Spike" etched into the back of his head.

I wont' ask her if she thinks a) Money grows on trees b) I own stock in the
electric company or c) I think we live in a barn, because today some money does
grow on trees if you plant it right, people trade utilities and do own stock in
the electric company and yes, people do renovate barns and resell them for half
a million dollars all in the name of gentrification, ruralization and
colonization. Those particular arguments hold little water and fit nicely in
that category of archaic lessons.

My wife recently remarked that I probably get my kicks going through old
yearbooks, calling old girlfriends and hoping that fringed jackets, be-ins and
rock operas all return to be in vogue. Hardly! Some things should stay relegated
to the 60's, 70's and 80's. I just want to save some of those things for my
offspring.

Several months ago while on business in Florida, I found myself minutes away
from my parents and thought it nice to visit. My father, taking delight in
grandfatherhood, asked what Erica and I do for fun. Without having a chance to
answer, he ventured we probably do 90's things -- computers, Roller-blading and
watching the "boob tube"; all this from a man who thinks there hasn't been a
good TV series since "The Fugitive." And he's right.

Harry Chapin tells the sad tale of a boy who grows up, has a son who then goes
on to be like him, detached and not having the time to enjoy life.

Well, not to worry Dad. We, like you, are stopping to smell the roses, not the
phony silk flowers. For my daughter and me, it may be Newark Airport, not
Idlewild, "Beauty and the Beast" not "Godzilla" and tossing a Frisbee, not
playing S-P-U-D . . . but the song remains the same, the lyrics just change a
bit. I spoil my daughter rotten. She has the most up-to-date Game Boy, her own
color TV and a collection of videos ranging from "The Mighty Ducks" to "The
Adventures of Little Donna Karan -- a 90's Designers Tale."

But she also takes hikes, bakes cookies, makes great lanyards in arts and crafts
and wants to be a lawyer.

Sadly though, these days, the spirit of holidays like the Fourth of July and
Labor Day is half-price sales, lower than low, cheaper than cheap. People pay
their respects at malls.

No, this time it was different. I switched off my modem and headed down to Main
Street. Some of my friends insist my values are rooted in fantasy. Perhaps, but
for me, reality is where I go to work each day and dreams are where I play.

I live in a world where some people still know how to have a good time. In fact,
just the other day, I told my daughter that if you tie a string to these two
paper cups you can talk to people in China. And you know something . . . it
worked.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Accused Businessman Is Linked to Secretary

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 225 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown met three times with a Vietnamese-American
businessman who has been accused of conspiring to pay Mr. Brown $700,000 to
pursue a trade policy favorable to Vietnam, a Federal law enforcement official
said today.

The official said an investigation into the conspiracy accusation, which had
been reported earlier, had not produced any evidence that Mr. Brown had violated
the law.

Mr. Brown could not be reached for comment. He has denied that he had engaged in
any improper activities.

Reports of meetings by Mr. Brown with the businessman, Nguyen Van Hao, first
appeared today in The Miami Herald and on the ABC News program "World News
Tonight."

The law enforcement official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the
meetings were being looked into but he could not verify the places and times of
the meetings.

Both news accounts said the two had met in Florida and in Washington before Mr.
Brown assumed his Cabinet office, and at the Commerce Department after he became
Secretary.

Ly Thanh Binh, a former associate of Mr. Hao who first made the conspiracy
accusations, told The Herald that Mr. Hao told him he met Mr. Brown to discuss
arranging for business deals in Vietnam. Mr. Hao has denied Mr. Binh's
accusations and has denied to The Herald ever meeting Mr. Brown, the newspaper
reported.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Puritans in High-Top Sneakers

BYLINE: By Richard A. Shweder;  Richard A. Shweder is professor of human
development at the University of Chicago. This is an excerpt from an address to
be given today to entering freshmen.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


Liberalism is sometimes identified with the spirit of "open-mindedness," yet the
idea of an "open mind" is notoriously difficult to define.

Consider, for example, Kurt Vonnegut's description of his education in
open-mindedness four decades ago at the greatest of all American universities.
This is what he recounts in his novel "Slaughterhouse-Five": "I went to the
University of Chicago for a while after the Second World War. I was a student in
the department of anthropology. They taught me that nobody was ridiculous or bad
or disgusting."

Mr. Vonnegut goes on to say he never wrote a book with a villain in it because
that is what they taught him at college. They taught him whatever is, is O.K. It
is precisely open-mindedness of that sort that led our former colleague Allan
Bloom to recommend closing the American mind.

Although provocation is a virtue at the University of Chicago, Allan Bloom's
book "The Closing of the American Mind" drove most of his reviewers, and even
some of his colleagues, wild. The incitement in the book was not so much his
ridicule of "Woodstock" (which he likened to Nazi rallies at Nuremberg) or of
rock music (which he viewed as obscene).

The real instigation was his complaint that the basic distinction between good
and evil, between culture and barbarism, had gone out of fashion on U.S.
campuses. Students, he claimed, have become so open-minded they don't make moral
judgments and feel embarrassed when others do. They have become so tolerant they
have lost their sense of taste. They are so enamored of the idea that beauty,
goodness and truth are in the eyes of the beholder that they have become blind
to things of genuine worth. They ascribe no greater value to the dialogues of
Socrates than to those of Beavis and Butt-Head.

Now I am not particularly a fan of Mr. Bloom's thesis, which Rolling Stone, in a
witty review of his book, called "fundamentalism for highbrows." I am far more
concerned about the Puritanism on campuses than the relativism. But every other
community has its sacred principles, so why shouldn't we? Think of
"fundamentalism for highbrows" as something like the 10 commandments for saving
the soul of liberal education. What should those commandments teach?

A Puritan is someone who exaggerates a virtue until it becomes a vice. Puritans
come clad in strait laces rather than in the untied sneakers that are the
footwear of the liberal soul on our campuses. There are Puritans of the left and
of the right. There are as many kinds of Puritans as there are kinds of virtues,
because any virtue can be overdrawn.

Imagine a world governed by some perfectly enforced virtue. Whenever I try this
exercise I reason myself into a horrow show.

Justice, for example, is a virtue. Many people spend their lives feeling
indignant about injustice. A few even succeed at bettering the world. Perhaps if
you are lucky your generation will develop a sense of itself as the 90's
generation because of the role you play during your college years in standing up
for what is just.

My generation has that sense of itself. Many of us who were students in the
1960's feel proud of the role we played in opposing the war in Vietnam and
marching on Washington for civil rights. One of us kept marching right into the
White House.

But a world of perfect justice would be a nightmare. Every error, indiscretion
or dark desire would show up on your "permanent record card." Actions and
outcomes would be exactly correlated. You would reap what you sowed and only
what you sowed. Forgiveness and redemption would be impossible. There would be
no such thing as luck.

You could never start over in a new town. To enforce perfect justice, someone
would have to be watching all the time. It would be a world run by accountants
and prosecutors. Too great an emphasis on "accountability" can be stifling to
the human spirit and dangerous to the life of the free university. Let us hope
the lesson of the Lani Guinier case is not to keep your scholarly mouth shut so
that one day you can make it in Washington.

Protecting people from harm is also a virtue. It is deeply offensive to the
human spirit when the vulnerable are exploited by those who should be caring for
them. Yet even here, Puritan alchemy is capable of turning a virtue into a vice.
A world comprehended only in terms of harm would be a disaster.

If you exaggerate the idea that you should be protected from harm, you have a
recipe for creating a society of thin-skinned complainers. For every parody or
personal slight (you "snake," you "pig," you "animal"), every act of criticism,
there would be an accusation of harassment or abuse. Hate groups and
anti-defamation leagues would quickly organize and keep each other in business.
Eventually the members of such a society would learn to keep their mouths
closed, their eyes covered and their doors shut, for fear of the consequences.
Then people would surely complain that the people they detest will have nothing
to do with them.

Even provocation can become a vice if it is the only virtue in a Puritan town.
There is no dignity in provocation if its only aim is to celebrate your freedom
to humiliate others or convict them of inferiority. Provocation is an act of
love, not hate. It serves the pursuits of truth and justice, and it protects
from harm those who use it wisely. But like anything else of value it must be
handled with care.

Of course, these days it has become very hard to know what it means to be
politically correct. Is it correct to be in favor of government regulation or
against it? Is it correct to celebrate the differences between men and women or
to deny that there are any? A few years ago the left-wing Government of Angola
employed Cuban troops to defend U.S. oil refineries against a Maoist
revolutionary supported by the Reagan Administration. It is hard to be
politically correct when the world starts to look like "Monty Python's Flying
Circus."

Yet let me not be evasive. Curiosity about variety, diversity and difference is
a mark of a liberal open mind. So is the celebration of difference. So is the
criticism of difference.

If P.C. refers to the tenet that nobody is "ridiculous or bad or disgusting," it
is an exaggeration of the virtue of tolerance, which makes it a form of
Puritanism, which is not a good thing. If it refers to the idea that the only
reason some people are not as accomplished as others is that they have been
victimized, then P.C. diminishes some pleasures of the brain. But of course, you
won't find any of that at the University of Chicago.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Commerce Secretary's Meetings Confirmed

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


A lawyer for the Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, today confirmed news
reports that Mr. Brown had met with a Vietnamese businessman three times. But
the lawyer, Reid Weingarten, said Mr. Brown had never agreed to the
businessman's proposals to lift the trade embargo against Vietnam.

A Federal grand jury in Miami has been investigating allegations that Mr. Brown
accepted $700,000 from the Vietnamese Government in exchange for helping lift
the trade embargo against that country by the United State. Mr. Brown has denied
the allegation.

Mr. Weingarten also said Mr. Brown's meeting with the man, Nguyen Van Hao, in
February at the Commerce Department was social and involved no business
discussions.

Mr. Weingarten denied a published report that Mr. Brown had provided a
Government limousine for the businessman's trip to the Commerce Department.

The accusations were made by Binh T. Ly, a former business partner of Mr. Hao.
Both Mr. Hao and Mr. Ly live in Florida.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

House Vote Urges Clinton to Limit American Role in Somali Conflict

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


In a demonstration of growing Congressional opposition to the continued
deployment of troops in Somalia, the House overwhelmingly passed a resolution
today demanding that the Administration put limits on its mission or face the
probability of a cutoff of funds.

As the House began its debate, President Clinton and other Administration
officials tried to assure Congressional leaders and the public that he would not
allow American troops to get bogged down in Somalia.

Reflecting a new sensitivity to such charges after meeting with Congressional
leaders today, President Clinton predicted that the United Nations would make a
real effort in the next few weeks to "articulate a strategy" to restore
self-government in Somalia.

'Raise the Visibility'

"I have tried to raise the visibility, or the urgency of getting the political
track back on pace," Mr. Clinton said, "because in the end, every peacekeeping
mission, or every humanitarian mission has to have a date certain when it's
over."

The nonbinding resolution, which has already passed the Senate, does not
specifically demand a withdrawal, but it calls on Mr. Clinton to seek
Congressional authorization by Nov. 15 to continue to deploy troops there.

The Congressional criticism put the White House on notice that Congress is
losing patience with a mission that has gone from feeding the starving to
hunting down a faction leader. That point of view has already been tacitly
accepted by the Administration, which this weekend shifted its goal from
capturing the leader, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid, toward building new political
structures that exclude him.

The speeches today were harsh on all sides. "Despite our best intentions, United
States policy in Somalia has failed," said Representative Benjamin A. Gilman,
Republican of upstate New York, the ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs
Committee. "It's time to bring our forces home."

Both Republicans and Democrats charged that the Administration had failed to
consult with the American people and appeared to be drifting without defining
its goals or exit strategy. One lawmaker after another expressed outrage over
the spectacle of Somalis marching through the streets celebrating the killing of
three American soldiers on Saturday.

"Recapture in your mind the unbelievable scene we saw on our televisions over
the weekend," said Representative John L. Mica, Republican of Florida. "Somalis
rejoicing with glee over the remains of our destroyed United States helicopter
and downed United States servicemen, our aircraft blasted out of the sky by
those we came to aid."

An Overwhelming Margin

The resolution passed by 406 to 26, with both Democrats and Republicans voting
overwhelmingly in favor.

The White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said the Administration intended to
continue consulting Congress, but expressed confidence that American policy in
Somalia is working.

"I think the toughest part of that mission, in many respects, is over," she
said. "The work is not done, but we've made great progress."

In a speech described as his farewell address, Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, cautioned against precipitous withdrawal
from situations like Somalia. "Because things get difficult, you don't cut and
run," General Powell said.  "You work the problem and try to find a correct
solution."

When President Bush sent troops into Somalia last December, the plan was for
them to establish order to allow food distribution to resume, then hand
responsibility to United Nations troops. That happened, but as the United
Nations forces have been drawn into fighting General Aidid's troops, so have the
American forces that have remained there under United Nations command.

Fifteen Americans have been killed since a force of 28,000 Americans was sent to
Somalia late last year, the State Department said today. There are now 4,400
United States troops in Somalia, out of a United Nations force of 27,000.

Walking a Tightrope

In recent weeks the Administration has tried to balance a desire to show its
resolve to complete its Somali mission with the need to reassure worried
lawmakers that the United States will not be pulled into a quagmire.

In an Aug. 27 speech, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin declared that there would
be no quick or easy way out of the conflict. More recently, Administration
officials have concentrated on describing the political work needed, playing
down the need for combat and emphasizing the United Nations' role.

Despite Mr. Clinton's remarks today, lawmakers remained skeptical. "Our troops
have worn out their welcome," said Representative H. James Saxton, a New Jersey
Republican.

Liberals criticized the Administration for trying to serve as kingmakers, while
conservatives characterized the deepening military involvement as a waste of
American lives and money. Members of both parties evoked images of Lebanon and
even Vietnam, warning that Congress would not again allow an Administration to
manage foreign interventions without tough Congressional monitoring.

Rules of Peacekeeping

Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of California, chairman of the Armed
Services Committee, said the Administration had broken the classic rules of
peacekeeping, which he described as "take no sides, make no enemies."

"Who gives us the right to determine who deserves to emerge in power in
Somalia?" Mr. Dellums asked. "Americans and Somalis alike are suffering needless
deaths. This must end."

Representative Harry A. Johnston, Democrat of Florida, chairman of the House
Subcommittee on Africa, was the one member who voiced full support for the
Administration's policy. Mr. Johnston said the United States had "to establish
law and order" in Somalia, or the international relief mission would fail.

The resolution, co-sponsored by Mr. Gilman and Representative Richard A.
Gephardt of Missouri, the majority leader, calls on President Clinton to declare
his objectives for the mission. The measure further requires that the President
seek Congressional authorization by Nov. 15 for keeping troops in the East
African country.

Several lawmakers said they thought the resolution was not tough enough,
expressing regret that Congress would not cut off the operation immediately. Not
surprisingly, Republicans tended to be more sharply critical of the
Administration for relying on the United Nations to guide its foreign policies.

More typical, however, were the criticisms of several of the most senior
Democrats serving in the House. Representative Dan Glickman of Kansas, chairman
of the Intelligence Committee, criticized the operation, saying "the command
lines are unclear and the intelligence is murky at best."

Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee, warned against a precipitious withdrawal but added, "I do not think
the United States should be involved in nation-buidling in Somalia."

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon's Medical School May Be Mustered Out

BYLINE: By SABRA CHARTRAND,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Sept. 25


Tucked away in the Clinton Administration's plan for streamlining the Government
is a way to save $300 million in five years: close the nation's only military
medical school, a 21-year-old complex behind the Naval Medical Center here.

The Defense Department pays five times as much to train a student here as at a
private medical school, according to the plan. The cost of training a military
doctor at the center, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
is $562,000. That includes tuition, military pay and benefits, internship,
residency and field training. The Administration says it would be cheaper to
expand its current practice of subsidizing some medical students. Such subsidies
average $110,000 a student, covering tuition, room and board.

The Administration's plan further says that most military doctors enter the
service through the scholarship program or are volunteers; only 10 percent of
the Army, Navy and Air Force doctors are graduates of the school.

Urged in Gore Rreport

The plan to close the school was a one-paragraph recommendation among more than
800 in a report on Government efficiency issued on Sept. 7 by Vice President Al
Gore. Like other proposals in the report, the school closing would be subject to
Congressional approval.

Advocates for closing the school contend that training for combat conditions is
already a fact of life for interns and resident doctors working in city
emergency rooms who routinely treat crash victims or people with knife or bullet
wounds.

But students at the school, which was established in 1972 to train doctors for
the all-volunteer army, contend that the specialized training they get cannot be
reduced to a price tag.

"We train for massive casualties; that's one example of the difference," said
Lieut. Evan Meeks of the Air Force, a former Army medic who is now in his second
year of medical school. Standing in the spare brick quadrangle of the campus, he
ticked off a list of military-related studies: chemical warfare, high-velocity
gunshot wounds, emergency medicine in the presence of enemy troops.

Different Gun Wounds

"People don't realize there are all kinds of different weapons we have to learn
about," Lieutenant Meeks said. "An M-16 rifle wound or AK-47 wound is very
different from those made by guns you'd find on city streets."

And, despite the prevalence of medical evacuation helicopters and other airborne
support craft now used in combat, the medical school says the training helps
students learn how to practice medicine in the field.

"Look at Somalia last December," said George Drumbor, director of university
affairs at the center. "The enemy was the environment. We had a hot, dry
climate, no sanitation, no water systems. How do they get fresh water, take care
of sanitation and support the battalion, brigade or division?"

Bob Stone, the White House official who is directing the program to streamline
the Government, said he was not persuaded by such arguments. "The Department of
Defense has been getting surgeons and doctors for battlefield jobs since long
before the medical school was formed," Mr. Stone said. "I'm surprised they'd say
that training is not available anywhere else."

It was, in part, to provide for such training that Congress created the
university, which now has about 800 students. With the end of the Vietnam-era
draft, the military feared a shortage of doctors in an all-volunteer service.
Students must apply as they would to any other medical school; once accepted,
they receive their military commission and a six-week basic training course
before beginning their first year of medical school.

At the same time, Congress created the Health Professionals Scholarship Program,
in which the military pays for thousands of medical students to go to other
state or private medical schools.

"The scholarship program has always been considered a cheaper way to get doctors
for the military," Mr. Stone said, adding that the Pentagon agrees. "They have a
working figure of saving $250 to $275 million by closing the school, which I
consider close enough to be in agreement with our five-year savings of $300
million."

Data on Savings Disputed

Mr. Drumbor contends that the analysis of the benefits of cutting the program is
misleading. It does not take into account the savings in medical care that the
military gains from sending its students to do their clinical work, internships
and residencies at military hospitals. And after they finish their training,
these doctors stay in the service longer, he said.

Graduates of the military university sign on for a seven-year tour of duty.
Students who attend other medical schools under the scholarship program are
civilians who are committed to only a four-year tour of duty after graduation.
Using those numbers, Mr. Drumbor calculated that "the scholarship program
averages $98,000 per year of service," while "the university costs a little over
$66,000 per year of service."

Like other Government programs and institutions listed for elimination in the
Gore report, the National Performance Review, the medical school is plotting
ways to survive legislative review. Supporters have an ally in Representative
Constance A. Morella, whose district includes Bethesda. Mrs. Morella, a
Republican, helped thwart a proposal to close the school three years ago. "That
move came from the Appropriations Committee and was a budget measure, too," she
said.

"These students specialize in battlefield conditions, and they're few in
number," the Congresswoman continued. "We still need that cadre."

Mr. Drumbor said the school was already preparing its own defense.  "This is a
recommendation in the executive branch, so we are attempting to get a rehearing
through the Department of Defense," he said. "At this point someone has pinned a
target on us. Who will shoot at it is unclear."

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

White House Defends Brown in Jury Inquiry

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


A day after Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown acknowledged for the first time
that he had met three times with a Vietnamese businessman whose dealings are
under scrutiny by a Federal grand jury, the White House was forced to defend the
Cabinet member and a House Republican demanded a Congressional investigation.

An account of Mr. Brown's meetings was provided by Reid Weingarten, the
Secretary's lawyer, who said on Monday that Mr. Brown's discussions with Nguyen
Van Hao, a businessman and former Vietnamese official, were "incidental and
innocuous." Mr. Weingarten denied that Mr. Brown engaged in any wrongdoing.

The accusations involving Mr. Brown, the former chairman of the Democratic
National Committee, drifted around political circles for months after Ly Thanh
Binh, a former business associate of Mr. Hao's, told the authorities that Mr.
Hao said he had offered Mr. Brown $700,000 in return for assistance in lifting
the United States trade embargo on Vietnam.

The meetings, first reported on Sunday by ABC News and The Miami Herald, seemed
at odds with the impression left by Mr. Brown in August when his office said in
a statement to U.S. News & World Report that "the Secretary categorically and
unequivocally denies he has ever had any business, financial or professional
relationship with any Vietnamese individual, organization or group."

'President Stands By Him'

At the White House today, Dee Dee Myers, Mr. Clinton's press secretary, faced a
barrage of questions about Mr. Brown. Refusing to be drawn into a discussion of
specific details, she said, "The President accepts his explanation and stands by
him."

Ms. Myers said Mr. Brown had first told Mr. Clinton about his meetings with Mr.
Hao in a conversation aboard Air Force One, in the same week the article
appeared in the U.S. News, when Mr. Brown and Mr. Clinton visited California
together. "He told the President that he had met with him and never discussed
money," Ms. Myers said.

Still, Ms. Myers's comments seemed to indicate a rising sense of concern about
Mr. Brown. She said that in recent days the Secretary had contacted Thomas F.
McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, to advise the White House that the
"allegations were swirling around, that there was no truth to them."

The official explanations failed to satisfy some Republican lawmakers.
Representative Dan Burton of Indiana asked the House Foreign Affairs Committee
to hold hearings on the issue. He made the request in a letter to Representative
Lee H. Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat and the committee chairman. Mr. Hamilton's
aides said the lawmaker had not yet decided how he would reply.

In Hands of Justice Department

A Federal grand jury in Miami has been investigating Mr. Binh's assertions for
weeks. Mr. Binh and Mr. Hao live in South Florida.

Prosecutors have turned over their findings to the Justice Department, where
senior officials have met to discuss the matter.

Mr. Weingarten said Mr. Brown never discussed receiving any payment from Mr. Hao
at any of the meetings. The lawyer said Mr. Brown first met with Mr. Hao in
Florida in November 1992, attending the meeting at the request of Marc Ashton, a
Haitian friend of Mr. Brown and an associate of Mr. Hao's.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Food Notes

BYLINE: By Florence Fabricant

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 591 words



A Plethora of Wares

The American Institute of Wine and Food is holding its annual Marketplace
Tasting on Saturday in the Winter Garden Atrium of the World Financial Center in
lower Manhattan. Farmers, cheese makers, wine makers, beer makers and bakers
will display their wares. Admission is free, but those who wish to taste must
buy a button for $10. The doors open at 9 A.M. for members of the institute, at
11 A.M. for others, and will remain open until 5 P.M.

Cutting Cookware Prices

Chantal Cookware, a line of heavy, brightly enameled pots, pans and kettles,
will be sold at deep discounts during a factory sale tomorrow through Sunday at
the Radisson Hotel Englewood, 401 South Van Brunt Street, off Route 4 in
Englewood, N.J., near the George Washington Bridge. The hours: 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
tomorrow through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M. Sunday.

Roll Out the Barrel

New York is turning into an Octoberfest, with beer events, beer dinners at
restaurants and beer benefits. One of the most elaborate is the New York
Beerfest sponsored by the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn, on Sunday from noon
to 7 P.M. on the esplanade under the Brooklyn side of the Brooklyn Bridge and in
the adjoining Empire-Fulton State Park. More than 50 breweries will offer
information and samples. Beer-friendly food will be served. Tickets are $20 in
advance from Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171. At the door they are $25.

Pub-Crawl Guide

"The Insider's Guide to Manhattan Bars" by Eric Zicklin (Citadel Press, $7.95)
is a pocket-size directory that sums up the drinking scenes in hundreds of bars
and restaurants. Whether your taste runs to black leather jackets or three-piece
suits, to romance or blaring rock music, you will probably find listings of
places with like-minded drinkers. The guide groups the bars by location,
describes the decor and indicates prices.

Chilis con Carnival

With beer? Chilis of course, and in Brooklyn, too. On Sunday from 10 A.M. to
4:30 P.M., the Brooklyn Botanic Garden is celebrating chili peppers with a
multi-ethnic festival that includes lectures, cooking and gardening
demonstrations, music, dance, crafts and food from places where chilis are king,
like South America, Thailand, Mexico, the Caribbean and the American Southwest.
The event is free, and food will be sold in the Terrace Cafe from 11 A.M. to 4
P.M.

Scrutable Asian Cuisine

Kelley & Ping, a new Asian grocery store at 127 Greene Street, near Houston
Street, is the brainchild of Brad Kelley and Lee Ping, who are aiming to make
Asian ingredients and equipment more easily understandable for non-Asians. They
also want to offer a taste of the colorful, raffish market atmosphere typical in
Asian countries.

"We're selling a selection of products from China, Japan, Korea, Thailand and
Vietnam, and we have people who can explain them," said Mr. Kelley, who with Ms.
Ping also owns Kin Khao, a Thai restaurant on Spring Street.

At the store, packaged foods, including soy sauce, vinegar, cooking wine, rice,
noodles, seaweed, spices, tea and candy are displayed on dark wood shelves.
Prices are closer to those of Chinatown than at Dean & DeLuca nearby. For
example, a 21-ounce bottle of excellent Pearl River soy sauce is $1.85.

Five chefs turn out soups, noodle dishes, Asian-style sandwiches, salads and so
on, to eat in or take out. A copious and delicious bowl of duck broth, with
pieces of duck, noodles and vegetables is $5.95.

The store is open from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. every day. Information: (212) 228-1212.


LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 30, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

President Defends Commerce Secretary on Dealings

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


President Clinton defended Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown today as
Republican lawmakers demanded a special prosecutor to investigate Mr. Brown's
relationship with a Vietnamese businessman whose dealings are under scrutiny by
a Federal grand jury in Florida.

In a display of support, Mr. Clinton walked with Mr. Brown into the Roosevelt
Room at the White House for an announcement of a new export strategy. With Mr.
Brown sitting a few feet away, the President heaped praise on his Commerce
Secretary and dismissed a reporter's question about whether the issue would
undermine Mr. Brown's effectiveness.

"He's told me that he hasn't done anything wrong," Mr. Clinton said. "He's done
just about everything right as Commerce Secretary. I think he's done a great
job, and I have no reason not to believe him."

Asked if the accusations would undercut Mr. Brown, Mr. Clinton replied, "Not if
he hasn't done anything wrong."

For all the praise, the fact that Mr. Clinton had to rally behind his Commerce
Secretary reflected the concern beginning to tug at the White House since Ly
Thanh Binh began talking to the authorities. Mr. Binh, a former associate of a
Vietnamese businessman in Florida, Nguyen Van Hao, said Mr. Hao had told him of
a plan to pay Mr. Brown $700,000 for his help in lifting the United States trade
embargo against Vietnam.

Initially, Mr. Brown's aides left the impression in comments to reporters that
Mr. Brown did not know Mr. Hao and had had no dealings with him of any kind. But
on Monday, Reid H. Weingarten, Mr. Brown's lawyer, said the Commerce Secretary
had met three times with Mr. Hao, twice before Mr. Brown joined the Clinton
Administration and once after.

The disclosure of the meetings has led Republicans to hint at scandal, and a few
have pressed the Administration to appoint an independent prosecutor.
Representatives Dana Rohrabacher of California and Dan Burton of Indiana called
for the appointment in speeches on the House floor. The law for appointing
special prosecutors expired in December, but Mr. Clinton has said he favors its
re-enactment.

'He Was Incredulous'

At a hearing of a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee today, Mr. Burton and Mr.
Rohrabacher asked Mr. Brown about the issue, but the Secretary would not answer
specific questions, citing the confidentiality of the criminal investigation.

"He was incredulous that anyone could have interpreted what he said as meaning
that he had never met with Mr. Hao," said Mr. Rohrabacher of Mr. Brown's
responses at today's hearing. "The guy's press secretary said he did not
remember meeting Mr. Hao. His answers aren't good enough."

A Federal grand jury in Miami has been investigating Mr. Binh's assertios for
weeks. Administration officials who have followed the inquiry said that at first
they had dismissed Mr. Binh's accusations. But in recent days, the inquiry has
taken a more serious cast as details of Mr. Brown's meetings with Mr. Hao
emerged.

Officials who once said they doubted that the investigation would uncover any
wrongdoing are now reluctant to predict the outcome, although they say no
evidence of a crime has been unearthed. One official said the investigation was
continuing with efforts to assess Mr. Binh's assertion that the money was to be
paid through a Singapore bank.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton defending Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown,
left, against accusations that he had improper dealings with a Vietnamese
businessman. At center was Vice President Al Gore. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 225 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 30, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

FUTURES MARKETS;
Oil Prices Rise After OPEC Reaches Accord on Quotas

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 379 words


Oil prices rose in New York yesterday as OPEC reached an accord on
fourth-quarter output quotas and political tensions heightened in the oil-rich
Siberian region of Russia.

November crude settled up 71 cents, to $18.67 a barrel.

The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries announced an agreement to
limit output to 24.5 million barrels a day for six months, with Kuwait agreeing
to a lower-than-expected 2-million-barrel-a-day quota.

News that Siberian politicians threatened to set up an autonomous republic
unless President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia repealed his degree dissolving
Parliament also contributed to strong prices.

Grain markets in Chicago discovered a new star as rice futures shot higher on
growing sentiment that United States rice exporters would crack the closed
Japanese market.  Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy said he hopes to discuss
United States sales of rice when he visits Japan next month.

November delivery of rough rice on the MidAmerica Commodity Exchange closed up
the daily limit of 30 cents a hundredweight at $6.74 a hundredweight.

"You've got people who never bought more than a two-pound bag of rice in their
life buying five lots over there today," one trader said. One contract on the
exchange calls for delivery of 2,000 hundredweight of rough, unprocessed rice.

Scott Minton, rice pit broker for Rodman & Renshaw, said that "almost every
major growing region has had weather problems," citing floods or drought that
cut rice crops in not just Japan but India, Thailand, Vietnam and Taiwan.

Wheat prices continued to rise on the back of strong exports, but corn and
soybeans fell again as colder weather appeared to be favorable to harvesting.

"It appears we've got some good harvest weather over the next four or five
days," said Steve Bruce of Geldermann Inc.

Coffee prices fell for the third straight session as traders weighed
uncertainties about a producer plan to hold back a fifth of exports starting
tomorrow.

"The focus in the next two or three days will be whether the Brazilian
Government finalizes the details surrounding retention and answers to the
private sector, which they have yet to do," a trade house broker said.

Brazil is the world's largest coffee exporter.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
