
                               1 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A City of Immigrants Is Pictured in Report

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


More than a quarter of the population of New York City is now foreign born as
the number of immigrants settling here has climbed to its highest level since
1940, according to a city report released yesterday.

In the report, a study of immigrants who arrived in the 1980's, a clear picture
emerges of just how dramatically the city's ethnic landscape is changing.

Just as schools in Queens and apartment buildings in northern Manhattan are
suffering overcrowding unseen for decades, declining neighborhoods are being
revitalized by the new immigrants.

Some of the changes are subtly profound: One in every four New York City blacks
is now foreign born. Puerto Ricans, long synonymous with Latin New York, now
make up only half the Hispanic population as the Dominican and Colombian
communities, in particular, grow. Little Italy is now primarily Chinese.

The most sweeping change, however, is this: While the immigants arriving in the
1940's were primarily white Europeans, the newest New Yorkers are and will
continue to be mostly Hispanic, black and, to a lesser extent, Asian, said the
report, by the city's Planning Department.

Nowhere is this more apparent than in Queens, a social laboratory of ethnic
diversity, and, in particular, on the Flushing IRT No. 7 train, variously dubbed
the Immigrants' IRT and the International Shuttle.

Rattling along on the No. 7 on Monday morning, a young couple ate a breakfast of
octopus from a plastic container, their Chinese newspaper brushing against the
Spanish-language tabloid of the next passenger. Two elderly Korean women
embraced bags filled with lemon grass, and the burly man beside them, forearm
tattooed with a Confederate flag, wore an American flag belt buckle.

"It could be seen, and is by some, in a negative light, that New York is turning
into a third world country," said Frank Sharry, executive director of the
National Immigration, Refugee and Citizenship Forum. "It could also be seen as a
wonderful experiment in the racial dynamics of pluralism."

Similar dynamics are transforming the country as a whole, as about 600,000 new
immigrants a year -- triple the number in the 1960's -- establish permanent
residency in the United States.

"In Russia, they told us we lived in the most international nation, but that was
a lie," said Olga Khey6fets, 68 years old, who recently left St. Petersburg for
Elmhurst, Queens. They city report called Elmhurst "perhaps themost ethnically
mixed community in the world," with 17,200 new immigrants from 118 countries who
arrived between 1983 and 1989 alone.

While Mexicans and Asians dominate the national picture, they are far
outnumbered in New York City by new Caribbean, Central American and South
American arrivals.

The top five countries sending immigrants to the United States are Mexico, with
the greatest number, then the Philippines, China, Vietnam and Korea. However,
less than 1 percent of Mexican immigrants settle in New York City, and only 4
percent of Filipinos.

For New York City, the top five source countries are the Dominican Republic,
substantially outpacing the others, and then Jamaica, China, Guyana and Haiti.
Sixty-one percent of all Dominican immigrants move to New York; 70 percent of
all Guyanese do so. In fact, about 8 percent of the total population of Guyana
moved to New York City in the 1980's, according to the city report.

The predominance of Caribbean and Latin American immigrants in New York shapes a
different kind of immigrant culture. For instance, far fewer Latin and Caribbean
immigrants end up seeking U.S. citizenship than do Asians, which means that New
York City's predominant immigrant groups move more slowly into American society.
In 1989, for example, the naturalization rate for Dominicans was only 18 percent
of eligible immigrants. For Filipinos, who settled in great numbers in Los
Angeles and San Francisco, the rate was 53 percent.

Many Caribbean and Latin immigrants see their national identity as more fluid,
experts say, to move back and forth between countries.

Nonetheless, the Dominicans have already elected a City Councilman, Guillermo
Linares, which suggests they will eventually move as aggressively into politics
as prior immigrant groups.

In total numbers, New York City receives more immigrants than any other city in
the country -- 685,000 between 1982 and 1989. These numbers do not include the
city's illegal immigrant population, which some immigration experts estimate at
about 200,000. They also do not give the best idea of the extent of the
immigrant population, because they do not take into account the children of the
many immigrant women of child-bearing age. The 1990 Census counted 953,000 New
Yorkers who entered the United States in the 1980's.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  the groups with the largest number of immigrants to New York City from
1983 to 1989 and where those groups have relocated.

                                      Number         %

1. Dominican Republic

All immigrants                      105,357      100.0
1. Washington Heights                27,805       25.7
2. Hamilton Heights                   7,363        7.0
3. Corona                             6,506        6.2
4. Inwood                             6,036        5.7
5. Chinatown                          3,577        3.4
   Williamsburg                       3,557        3.4

2. Jamaica

All immigrants                       63,226      100.0
1. East Flatbush                      5,656        8.9
2. Crown Heights                      5,469        8.6
3. Flatbush                           4,983        7.9
4. Wakefield                          4,357        6.9
5. Williamsbridge-Baychester          3,384        5.4

3. China

All immigrants                       64,184      100.0
1. Chinatown                         19,550       30.5
2. Elmhurst                           3,680        5.7
3. Flushing                           3,227        5.0
4. Sunset Park-Industry City          2,442        3.8
5. Bay Ridge                          1,805        2.8

4. Guyana

All immigrants                       46,706      100.0
1. East Flatbush                       3,425       7.3
2. Flatbush                           2,992        6.4
3. Richmond Hill                      2,979        6.4
4. Crown Heights                      2,495        5.3
5. Cypress Hills                      1,643        3.5

5. Haiti

All immigrants                       34,046      100.0
1. Flatbush                           8,303       23.0
2. Crown Heights                      5,336       14.8
3. East Flatbush                      4,056       11.3
4. Vanderveer                         1,837        5.1
5. Brownsville                        1,415        3.9


Graph: "Compare and Contrast: Two Different Immigration Pictures"
Table: "Immigration: After They Reach New York"

New York City's immigrant pool from 1982 to 1989 was drawn mostly from the
Caribbean while the U.S. as a whole drew in more Meixcan and Asian immigrants.

NEW YORK CITY

1. Dominican Republic: 16.9%
2. Jamaica: 10.6%
3. China: 10.5
4. Guyana: 7.8
5. Haiti: 6.0

Others: 48.2

Total immigrants from 1982 to 1989: 684,819

U.S.

1. Mexico: 11.3%
2. Philippines: 8.1
3. China: 7.6
4. Vietnam: 6.3
5. Korea: 5.8

Others: 61.0

Total immigrants from 1982 to 1989: 4,726,165

(Sources: New York City Planning Department analysis of census and Immigration
and Naturalization Services data) (pgs. B1 and B2)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

How a Magazine Evolved Into an Institution

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1027 words


For much of its 67-year history, The New Yorker has seemed to float in splendid
isolation, a law unto itself, unruffled by the turbulence that disturbs lesser
magazines.

The last decade has changed all that.

The announcement that Tina Brown, the editor in chief of Vanity Fair, will
replace Robert A. Gottlieb as editor of The New Yorker means the magazine will
have its second new editor in five years. The changes in editorship represent a
dramatic increase in the metabolic rate of a magazine whose first two editors,
Harold W. Ross and William Shawn, presided for more than half a century.

Mr. Shawn, a managing editor who took over the top spot when Mr. Ross died in
1951, after in effect having run the show for two years, edited the magazine for
so long that an entire generation of readers grew up with no memory of the Ross
New Yorker, a quite different magazine than the one Mr. Gottlieb inherited from
Mr. Shawn.

From Bite to Whimsy

In its original form, The New Yorker was a brilliant, unpredictable product of
the Jazz Age, irreverent, brisk, gossipy and sharp. The provocative tone was set
by contributors like Dorothy Parker, Wolcott Gibbs, Robert Benchley and James
Thurber, and later by S. J. Perelman and A. J. Liebling.

The humor, both in the articles and the cartoons, had a bite that one does not
associate with the gentle whimsy that the magazine came to embrace.

In an age when rural and urban America were starkly divided in manners and
morals, The New Yorker was emphatically a magazine of, by and for the city. It
was not intended, as Ross put it in a prospectus for the magazine, for "the old
lady from Dubuque."

Under the quieter and more reflective Mr. Shawn, the magazine, already
profitable, grew into a rich and prestigious powerhouse, with a reputation for
comprehensive, acute profiles and multi-part reporting articles on important
issues.

The list of pioneering New Yorker articles on major political, social and
environmental subjects includes John Hersey's report on the aftermath of the
Hiroshima bombing, one of the last articles assigned by Ross; Rachel Carson's
series that became "Silent Spring"; "The Fire Next Time," by James Baldwin,
about race relations; Hannah Arendt's "Eichmann in Jerusalem," and Jonathan
Schell's reports from Vietnam.

The New Yorker also adopted a strong editorial voice articulating liberal
principles and emerged as an early critic of American involvement in Vietnam.

A Growing Mystique

Under Mr. Shawn, many of the quirks and oddities of the magazine's culture
assumed the status of legend. Almost as famous as Eustace Tilley, the man in the
monocle inspecting a butterfly, were the exaggerated discretion and courtesy of
Mr. Shawn, the hushed, religious atmosphere and studied disarray of the magazine
offices, the obsession with fact-checking. For admirers of the magazine, this
was part of its mystique. Others found it annoying and precious.

In a savage review of Brendan Gill's history of the magazine, "Here at The New
Yorker," the British writer Anthony West proposed a counterargument to Mr.
Gill's orthodox view that Mr. Shawn had preserved the best of the Ross tradition
and added to it a moral seriousness and a commitment to searching journalism on
important topics.

Mr. West argued that Mr. Shawn, in the guise of preserving The New Yorker,
embalmed it. The radical, unruly magazine that Ross created gradually became a
genteel Victorian product, pumping out mood music for the upper middle classes.

"It was sassier under Ross, but then, the times were sassier," said Gardner
Botsford, who joined the magazine in 1939 and was managing editor under Mr.
Shawn, retiring in 1982. 'It's hard to be sassy when you have the Holocaust and
the atomic bomb."

Without question, the magazine represented a heaven to which many writers hoped
to ascend.

Freshening the Product

By the end of the Shawn era, the weaknesses inherent in The New Yorker's virtues
were becoming apparent. In-depth often meant long-winded and boring. Serious
reporting often produced what Michael Kinsley, a former editor of The New
Republic, described in an interview as the magazine's besetting sins: "the
accretion of tiny detail, the endless length, the deadening and unenlightening
pieces."

The emphasis on continuity and a civilized, paternal atmosphere had left the
magazine with an oversupply of longtime contributors whose best work was behind
them.

In 1985, when S. I. Newhouse Jr. bought the magazine and added it to the Conde
Nast stable, it was losing advertising and circulation.

Mr. Gottlieb arrived from Alfred A. Knopf, where he had been president and
editor in chief, with a clear mandate: to deliver a newer, fresher version of
the magazine that would appeal to younger readers without alienating longtime
subscribers.

"Bob extended the tradition that Shawn and Ross had invented, and rejuvenated
it," said Adam Gopnik, The New Yorker's art critic, who arrived at the magazine
about the same time Mr. Gottlieb was hired.

Those efforts included a revamping of the Goings On About Town listings section
at the front of the magazine, known as GOAT, to include illustrations and
200-word descriptions of selected events and personalities.

Back to Sass

Mr. Gottlieb also brought to the magazine his keen interest in American popular
culture and what some critics found to be an unhealthy fascination with kitsch.
But changes to the magazine were minimal. At any other magazine, they would have
been regarded as microscopic.

"The best thing about Bob was that he didn't really change anything," Mr.
Botsford said. "He kept the place on an even keel, and one would hardly know
that there was a new editor, except for a few new things. The new writers wrote
in the same style and attitude as the old people, and the attention to detail
was just as serious."

The appointment of Ms. Brown may mean The New Yorker's staff members will want
to fasten their seat belts for a thrilling and unpredictable ride. But Ms. Brown
is an editor whose taste for the irreverent, the gossipy and the sassy might not
be entirely alien to the spirit of Harold Ross.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail;
SENATE P.O.W.-M.I.A. PANEL TAKES PEROT'S TESTIMONY

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


Two investigators from the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs took
testimony today from Ross Perot, a committee spokeswoman said. Mr. Perot was
interviewed under oath in Dallas to get his views on how five administrations
have handled the issue of prisoners of war and military personnel missing in
action, the spokeswoman, Deborah DeYoung, said.

Mr. Perot has long accused the Government of abandoning Americans imprisoned in
Indochina during the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
A Hamilton Era?

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


Barring surprises like being elected Vice President, Lee Hamilton will become
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee next year. His career and
character suggest he could spark far-reaching changes in how U.S. foreign policy
is made and in the policy sausage that oozes from this new grinder.

Look for an end to the traditionally cozy connection between the White House and
the chairman of the House panel. Look for stunning proposals to reorganize
Washington's foreign policy machinery, including perhaps eliminating the
enfeebled Agency for International Development. Look for a drive to recast
priorities, much more economic emphasis and much less military-mindedness.

The Indiana Democrat does not want his approaches confused with isolationism. "I
want the United States to be a world leader," he told me. "I don't agree with
those who think we should play a reduced role in foreign affairs."

His goals could readily vaporize in the hands of a less determined and
knowledgeable politician. But Mr. Hamilton, though gentlemanly and soft-spoken,
also seems to have the steel and skill to be a powerhouse.

What, then, could derail a Hamilton era in the House, one that might rival and
even exceed William Fulbright's mastery of Senate debate during the Vietnam War?

Bill Clinton could choose Mr. Hamilton as his running mate. But joining the
ticket would not force the Congressman to abandon his safe seat. Indiana law,
unusually, permits running for both offices. So even if a Clinton-Hamilton
ticket loses, Mr. Hamilton almost certainly would be back in Congress.

Committee Republicans could fight Hamilton reforms. That is not likely either.
Benjamin Gillman of upstate New York will replace the retiring William
Broomfield as the ranking Republican, and Mr. Gillman is a genial man with no
strong policy agenda. That leaves fellow Midwesterners Jim Leach and Jeff
Bereuter as two key G.O.P. players, and both lean toward Mr. Hamilton's ideas.
Only Henry Hyde, a partisan infighter, promises to be a problem.

Mr. Hamilton's strongest opposition could come from the institutional inertia of
the committee itself. Congressional committees tend to develop their own styles.
The House Armed Services Committee, for example, has been an independent and
highly centralized operation since the days of Southern barons Carl Vinson and
Mendel Rivers. This perfectly suits Les Aspin, the current chairman of that
panel.

But the House Foreign Affairs Committee has traditionally been a far more
decentralized operation -- dating back decades from the leadership of "Doc"
Morgan and Clement Zablocki to its present leader, Dante Fascell, who will
retire in December. Under their loose reign, subcommittee chairmen tended to go
their separate ways.

Mr. Hamilton, however, has the necessary sway among Democrats to gather power in
the committee as a whole. Stephen Solarz, who will be the number two Democrat on
the panel if re-elected, is unlikely to challenge him. Besides, at least 7 of
the top 11 Democrats on the committee will not be back next year.

Nonetheless, Mr. Hamilton cannot ignore the even deeper Morgan-Zablocki-Fascell
tradition of helping out the White House. Since World War II, Presidents of both
parties often got grief from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, but could
count on its House counterpart. The House committee help proved decisive on
crunch issues like Vietnam.

More recently, Mr. Fascell rounded up crucial Democratic votes for aid to the
contras in Nicaragua and President Bush's decision to use force against Iraq.
Mr. Hamilton opposed contra aid and favored giving economic sanctions more time
before attacking Saddam Hussein.

Lee Hamilton is far less likely than his predecessors to salute a desperate call
from the White House. He will listen, politely and seriously as always, then
make up his own mind.

Besides his independence, Mr. Hamilton's greatest strength is also his weakness.
He is an educator, a persuader. He believes in exposing the facts and issues,
then engaging in reasoned debate. That gift was sufficient for Senator Fulbright
gradually to shift public attitudes toward the Vietnam War. But it was not
enough to win legislative battles.

To fulfill his promise, Mr. Hamilton will have to go beyond teaching -- and put
his legislative mark on machinery and policy.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
AIDS Demonstrators Disrupt Perot Rally

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: OLYMPIA, Wash., July 2


With 200 American flags held aloft by volunteers standing on the steps of the
Capitol under a crystal blue sky, it was the kind of camera-pleasing visual
feast that organizers of Ross Perot's rallies strive for. But in their eyes this
snapshot of Americana was marred for a time today by the presence of another
image of late 20th century America: protesters.

A handful of members of Act Up, an advocacy group for people with AIDS, briefly
took over the stage at Mr. Perot's rally here today, vowing not to leave until
the Texas billionaire addressed issues of AIDS and gay rights. They wanted him
to explain comments he has made saying he would not appoint homosexuals to his
cabinet and would not lift the military's ban on homosexual soldiers.

"We want to know what Ross Perot stands for here in Olympia in Washington
State," Stephen Michael, a member of Act Up from Seattle, shouted through a
hand-held public address system. "We want answers. What does Ross Perot believe?
Nobody has any idea, because Ross Perot won't say."

To head off further disruption, Mr. Perot met for 20 minutes with Mr. Michael
and several other Act Up representatives, delaying the start of his rally. Mr.
Michael said that Mr. Perot promised he would address gay rights issues. But in
his brief remarks to the crowd of about 4,000 people, Mr. Perot did not refer to
the demonstration or to gay issues.

Instead, Mr. Perot kept to his standard speech, urging the crowd to remain
involved in the political process.

"Does everybody here understand that you cannot elect someone and send that
person to Washington and have that person do it for you?" Mr. Perot asked the
crowd. "You are going to have to stay deeply involved at the local, county,
state and national level, as an owner, for these revolutionary changes to occur.
But if you, the taxpayers want it, you can get it."

Mr. Perot urged the audience to register voters, whether or not they intend to
vote for him, and he praised Washington's voter registration law, which allows
individuals to register when they renew their drivers licenses.

His comment came the same day President Bush vetoed legislation passed by
Congress that would have allowed voters nationwide to register when they renew
drivers licenses, at unemployment offices or when they apply for welfare. Mr.
Bush said the measure would encourage voter fraud.

Lifestyle Questions Arising

While gay rights demonstrators have appeared at a number of Mr. Perot's rallies
in recent weeks, today was the first time they succeeded in disrupting the
proceedings. The presence of the protesters indicates that while Mr. Perot
strives to focus his embryonic campaign on the issue of economic growth,
questions concerning his tolerance of diverse lifestyles may continue to haunt
him.

The demonstration came a day after the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith
released a letter from Morton H. Meyerson, former president of Electronic Data
Systems, and a top aide to Mr. Perot, defending the company's dismissal in 1983
of an employee in Seattle who grew a beard in violation of company policy. The
employee, Reginald Dallaire, claimed to be an Orthodox Jew and refused to shave
for religious reasons.

A Federal judge ruled that Mr. Dallaire had been discriminated against because
of his religion and ordered his reinstatement. Mr. Dallaire later quit the
company and moved to Alaska.

A two-page memorandum that accompanied Mr. Meyerson's letter questioned Mr.
Dallaire's sincerity and raised questions about his motives and his character,
issues that E.D.S. had not raised during the court hearing on the case,
according to Mr. Dallaire's lawyer. The memorandum also indicated that after the
suit had been settled and Mr. Dallaire had moved, his supervisors questioned his
former neighbors about him.

According to the memorandum, Mr. Dallaire's neighbors told his supervisor, "that
they had been somewhat afraid of him. It seems that he had the habit of mowing
his lawn while wearing visible firearms. He also told some neighbors that he
been (sic) a sharpshooter in Vietnam and stalked people through the wooded areas
in Washington with his rifle to prove that he still had his sniping abilities."

The memo did not say why neighbors were questioned after Mr. Dallaire had
already left the company.

"That's an incredible set of allegations, none of which were raised at the
time," said Michael Reiss, a lawyer with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission who handled Mr. Dallaire's complaint against E.D.S. "Either it's a
fabrication or a case where they're going out to try and get dirt on somebody
after he's left the company."

In a telephone interview today, Mr. Meyerson said he "did not have the foggiest
idea" why Mr. Dallaire's supervisor questioned his neighbors.

Today's disruption also highlighted the mistakes that can be made by a his
grass-roots campaign organization that relies on enthusiastic but often
inexperienced volunteers. In organizing the rally at which they turned in
petitions containing more than 55,000 signatures, Mr. Perot's volunteers failed
to get a permit to hold the event on the steps of the State Capitol. As a
result, they did not have exclusive use of the steps, and could not force the
ACT UP demonstrators to leave.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Ross Perot has soared to the lead in Presidential polls, he
has benefited from the view that as a businessman, he can root out waste and
make Government more efficient. Mr. Perot waved to a crowd of about 6,000
supporters yesterday at a rally at the State Capitol in Olympia, Wash.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Yeltsin Says Russia Pursues P.O.W. Cases

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 238 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 2


Russian investigators are pursuing several dozen cases of missing American
prisoners of war who passed through Soviet hands and they will not rest until
their fate is known, President Boris N. Yeltsin was quoted today as saying.

The early edition of Friday's Komsomolskaya Pravda, out today, quoted Mr.
Yeltsin as saying that almost all 24,544 P.O.W.'s from World War II, Korea and
Vietnam listed in Soviet records were repatriated, or died in camps or in
transit.

"But several dozen people have not been accounted for -- where they went and
what happened to them," Mr. Yeltsin said. "Earlier, these facts were denied and
it was alleged that such people simply did not exist."

Mr. Yeltsin's remarks were taken from a two-hour phone-in with newspaper readers
earlier this week, the newspaper said.

Mr. Yeltsin was quoted as saying that grave sites of former prisoners had been
discovered and invitations to visit were being issued to family members in the
United States. Work on the missing prisoners would continue, he said.

Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov, who heads a joint Russian-United States commission, said
last week that four Americans had been held at a Soviet psychiatric hospital in
1953. Their identities remained unclear, he said.

Russian and United States experts have expressed skepticism about Mr. Yeltsin's
earlier suggestions that American P.O.W.'s could still be alive somewhere on
Russian soil.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.N. General: In the Middle, Under Attack

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1359 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, July 2


For weeks, Sarajevans watched Maj. Gen. Lewis W. MacKenzie, commander of the
United Nations force sent to seek a cease-fire here, with the growing suspicion
that he was little more than a spectator at their annihilation by the Serbian
forces that ring the city.

But this week, the general's stock among Sarajevo's 400,000 hungry and
frightened residents has risen with the departure of Serbian troops from the
airport, where the raising of the United Nations flag on Monday was followed
within hours by the arrival of the first planeload of food and medicine.

Today, a 750-man Canadian mechanized battalion arrived at the airport after a
difficult 48-hour journey from Croatia, 200 miles north of here, reinforcing the
scanty United Nations defenses and allowing General MacKenzie to declare the
airfield officially open for the full-scale humanitarian airlift mandated by the
Security Council.

About 60 tons of relief supplies have arrived so far, and some have begun to be
distributed to the residents.

On a tour of the city on Wednesday, General MacKenzie was greeted warmly by
dozens of citizens, suggesting that many here appreciate the 20-hour days he put
in, for 20 days continuously, in getting the warring sides to agree on the
airport reopening.

Many Remain Wary

But many people here remain profoundly wary, believing that what he has achieved
is tenuous and a long way from the general cease-fire around Sarajevo that the
Security Council has ordered. The achievements of the last few days have not
erased the animosity captured by fliers printed in the Presidency building, seat
of the Bosnian Government, that referred to the general's United Nations
Protection Force, or Unprofor, its acronym, as "Serbofor."

Whenever he has ventured into the heart of the city from the United Nations
headquarters in the western outskirts, General MacKenzie has been ensconced
inside an armored personnel carrier driven by French paratroops, with a
swiveling machine-gun turret to discourage snipers in high-rise buildings. The
sense that he has a measure of security not available to Sarajevo's permanent
inhabitants, who scamper through the streets in the hope of avoiding Serbian
artillery, mortar and rocket fire, has not endeared him to the citizenry.

"General, you always ride in a box," said Ejup Ganic, the 43-year-old Muslim who
is a Vice President in the Bosnian Government. "It is time to come and see the
city as it really is."

It was this chiding that prompted the general to make the tour of the city on
Wednesday. It included a visit to one of the many graveyards that have been
opened in Sarajevo's public parks. For a minute, as cameras whirred, General
MacKenzie gazed over the graves of hundreds of Muslim fighters who have died
since the Serbian nationalists began their siege of Sarajevo on April 5.

It was an important moment for the general's mission here, and he met it with
laconic comments in keeping with his pledge to say nothing to interfere with his
ability to talk to both sides in the Sarajevo siege.

"There has been a great human tragedy here, as there is in all wars," he said as
he completed a visit to the graveyard, to severely wounded civilians in an old
military hospital and to the memorial at a city-center pedestrian mall where 22
people were killed by Serbian mortars while lining up for bread.

Another epithet for the United Nations force that became common is "terrorist
taxi service." This referred to an occasion when General MacKenzie approved the
use of a United Nations armored vehicle to transport Biljana Playsic, the
biology professor who is a deputy leader of the Serbian nationalist forces
attacking the city. Mrs. Plavsic, who was involved in negotiations with Bosnian
Government leaders at the United Nations headquarters, had sought help in
getting to and from the apartment where she lived with her 92-year-old mother
and in moving her brother to the apartment to look after her mother in her
absence. But the United Nations vehicle was stopped by angry crowds, and only
armed United Nations soldiers prevented Mrs. Plavsic from being pulled from the
vehicle.

Hostility Directed at Canadian

The incident became a major talking point in the city, contributing to a sense
that the United Nations force was sympathetic to the Serbian side. The hostility
culminated with a letter to a newspaper in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, that
called General MacKenzie "a war criminal."

This nettled the quiet-spoken Canadian, who is on his eighth United Nations
assignment. "You just want to go out into the city and speak to everyone you can
find, and set the facts straight," he said.

The United Nations assignments, accounting for about a third of the general's
31-year military career, have included tours in Gaza, Cyprus, Egypt, Vietnam and
Central America. The tours make the general one of the most experienced officers
ever to command peacekeeping troops. But he said his assignment here, for which
he was detached from command of the Canadian Army in the Toronto region, has
proved more difficult than any other he has faced.

"It's the most complex situation I've ever encountered by a factor of 10," he
said in his spartan office in the United Nations headquarters, in a seven-story
office building that has been hit numerous times by Serbian shells.

The interview was repeatedly interrupted by telephone calls from reporters in
Britain, France and the United States, to approve reports to United Nations
headquarters in New York and to reassure anxious Bosnian Government officials
and their Serbian opponents over the tenuous military situation around the
airport.

"No, professor, we are not leaving the airport," he said at one point, talking
to Nilola Koljevic, another deputy leader of the Serbian nationalists. "It's
just a rumor. You can relax."

Mr. Koljevic's group took to arms in March to create a separate "ethnically
cleansed" Serbian republic on two-thirds of Bosnia and Herzegovina's territory,
where Serbs account for 32 percent of the population.

Much as the animosity of Sarajevans has troubled him. General MacKenzie is
insistent that his mediator's role here obliges him not to give voice to
feelings about what the Serbian forces have done to the city.

"I can understand what they feel -- that I have not stopped the shelling of the
city," he said. "I understand it, and I'm not comfortable with it. But for now I
have to put blinders on, so that I can continue to speak to both sides."

What the general does not say publicly about the city's destruction he confides
to a small red diary that he keeps on his office desk, beside the pistol that is
his only weapon and photographs taken of him at the wheel of the racing cars
that are his passion.

While he enjoys the risks of motor racing, the hazards of Sarajevo, which have
included several machine-gun attacks on his armored personnel carrier in
contested areas around the airport, have convinced him that Canadians should
count themselves lucky to be talking and not fighting over their own national
problems, involving Quebec.

"If Bosnians were Canadians, we'd simply take the whole population and bore them
to death with conferences," he said. "I used to hate all the endless political
talk at home. Now I can hardly wait to get back to it."

                             --------------------


Planes Carrying U.S. Aid

RAMSTEIN, Germany, Friday, July 3 (AP) -- Planes carrying American aid for
Bosnia and Herzegovina took off today as the United States joined other
countries in the relief effort for Sarajevo, the capital.

One C-130 transport plane, loaded with forklifts and other equipment, took off
from Rhein-Main Air Base, which is outside Frankfurt, Germany. It is to be
followed by another one today with 10 tons of military rations.

Both planes are to refuel in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, before flying on to
Sarajevo. Another C-130, carrying 16 tons of medical supplies from the
Americares, a humanitarian organization based in Connecticut, arrived in
Sarajevo on Thursday in Sarajevo, the group said. It said the plane was being
borrowed from Norway.


NAME: Lewis W. MacKenzie

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 10, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about Maj. Gen. Lewis W.
MacKenzie, commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
referred incorrectly to the transporting of a Serbian official into Sarajevo in
a United Nations armored vehicle. It was a subordinate, not General MacKenzie
himself, who made the vehicle available to the Serbian official.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The airport at Sarajevo was officially declared opened to
relief flights yesterday after a Canadian battalion secured it for the United
Nations force. Soldiers of the mechanized unit guarded the perimeter of the
airport; Maj. Gen. Lewis W. MacKenzie, commander of the U.N. force, welcomed the
reinforcements after their 200-mile trek. (Associated Press)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina highlighting the location of Sarajevo.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

China Trade Curb Backed

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 3


The House Ways and Means Committee has approved a bill that would attach
conditions to the renewal of China's favorable trading status with the United
States.

The bill -- approved on Thursday on a voice vote -- is opposed by President
Bush, who contends that continued trade links are needed to maintain United
States influence on Beijing's policies.

Sponsored by Democrats, the legislation would restrict China's access to the
United States market if Beijing did not meet conditions relating to human
rights, nuclear transfers, arms sales to Syria and Iran and unfair trade
practices.

It would also demand an accounting from China about the fate of United States
soldiers that China might have held after the Vietnam and Korean wars.

The bill would apply only to goods produced, marketed or otherwise exported by
Chinese state-owned enterprises, rather than all Chinese exports to the United
States.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

John Buettner-Janusch, 67, Dies; N.Y.U. Professor Poisoned Candy

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


John Buettner-Janusch, a prominent anthropologist who was convicted of making
illicit drugs in his campus laboratory and who then tried to kill the trial
judge with poisoned candy, died on Thursday at a medical center for Federal
prisoners in Springfield, Mo. He was 67 years old.

He died of pneumonia, said William B. Wachtel, his lawyer. He added that Dr.
Buettner-Janusch was in failing health and, disheartened by a recent ruling that
he would not be freed until after the year 2000, had stopped eating and been
force-fed.

Before his legal problems, Dr. Buettner-Janusch had a distinguished career as an
educator and researcher. Described by colleagues as brilliant, he ranked among
the nation's top 10 physical anthropologists. He specialized in genetics,
biochemistry and the evolution of simians and humans.

He served as chairman of New York University's anthropology department from 1973
to 1979. He wrote over 100 articles in scientific journals and a widely used
text, "Origins of Man" (Wiley, 1966). He was the scientific chairman of the
Caribbean Primate Research Center and a member of the National Science
Foundation's anthropology panel and the board of the American Association of
Physical Anthropologists.

Jailed in World War II

He supported civil rights and labor causes, opposed the Vietnam War and was
jailed as a conscientious objector in World War II, Mr. Wachtel said.  Known as
B. J., he was flamboyant, with dyed blond hair and expensive suits. Critics
called him erratic and tyrannical. He became depressed when his wife and
colleague of 27 years, Vina Mallowitz, died of cancer in 1977.

In 1979 a Federal indictment charged that he had converted his lab into a drug
factory, using his assistants to make LSD and methaqualone for sale.

To the end, Dr. Buettner-Janusch maintained that he was innocent. His lawyer
hinted that students made the drugs and, when caught, made the professor a
scapegoat. The 1980 trial resulted in convictions for making and possessing
drugs, conspiracy and lying to investigators. He was sentenced to five years but
was paroled in 1983.

In 1987 he was charged with sending poisoned Valentine's Day chocolates to the
judge in the drug case, Charles L. Brieant Jr. The judge's wife fell seriously
ill after eating four pieces of Golden Godiva candies but survived.

A print on the box from his little finger gave Dr. Buettner-Janusch away.
Adulterated candy was also sent to a former colleague at Duke University, and
authorities intercepted two other boxes. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to
20 years.

Born in Chicago, Dr. Buettner-Janusch grew up in Eagle River, Wis.

He graduated from the University of Chicago in 1948 and earned a doctorate at
the University of Michigan in 1957. From 1959 to 1965 he taught at Yale. From
1965 to 1973 he was at Duke.

Surviving is a sister, Teddy Letts of Omaha, Neb.

NAME: John Buettner-Janusch

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Buettner-Janusch (The New York Times, 1979)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Quayle's Moment

BYLINE: By Andrew Rosenthal;  Andrew Rosenthal is a White House correspondent of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 11; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4321 words


A smile of triumph flickers around the mouth of Dan Quayle. Playfully tugging at
the cord of his high-security telephone, the Vice President looks relaxed and
not a little pleased with himself as he sits in shirt sleeves in his stateroom
aboard Air Force Two, flying home after a momentous trip to California.

The day before, Quayle had burst into the national political spotlight with an
attack on the television heroine Murphy Brown's unwed motherhood. The immediate
aftermath had been tense -- with the White House waffling embarrassingly,
running for cover in alarm over Quayle's salvos against a program with 38
million viewers. But Quayle, after checking in with President Bush himself,
seems confident that he is, for the moment, off the hook. He cheerfully reports
that the Commander in Chief has ordered him to go full speed ahead with his
campaign for "family values."

Which is exactly what Quayle has done. Over the next six weeks, in a series of
high-profile speeches that vaulted him onto the front page and the evening news,
the Vice President declared war on what he calls the "cultural elites." Like
Vice Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Spiro T. Agnew before him, Quayle had
rediscovered the power of negative thinking. By attacking, among other things,
Hollywood, the news media, academics, abortion rights activists, East Coast
liberals, gay couples, New York City and Mario M. Cuomo, the Vice President had
got not only what he so badly craves -- press attention as something more than
Mr. Malaprop -- but had polarized the 1992 election into an "us versus them"
battle. The strategy is clear: by dividing the country, he and his Republican
advisers hope to conquer it.

For the newly self-confident Quayle, this period has marked a remarkable
transformation from, as the writer Larry Gelbart put it, "lap dog" to "attack
dog." It has been almost four years since Presidential candidate Bush plucked
Quayle, then Indiana's junior Senator, from relative obscurity and made him his
running mate. Quayle was supposed to lend the ticket youth, rock-ribbed,
Midwestern conservatism and looks that would appeal to women. Instead, Quayle's
many gaffes and inexperience under fire forced G.O.P. strategists eventually to
confine his campaign stops to elementary-school classrooms. Throughout his term
as Vice President, Quayle has continued to be haunted by verbal miscues that
have made him America's leading symbol of blooper and blunder. But after years
of struggling on many painful occasions to play the good sport when the
late-night comedians made mincemeat out of his latest stumble, Quayle is no
longer content to stay in the background -- as good Vice Presidents are supposed
to do and as Bush himself did when he was on the job.

At a time when the Bush White House and campaign team seem ideologically and
strategically adrift, Quayle has sharply defined himself and his vision for the
G.O.P. A self-styled defender of traditional American values, he has adopted a
time-honored Republican campaign strategy, pitting himself and his party against
those he says scorn the institutions of family, religion and patriotism. Some in
his party, especially on the right, have applauded Quayle's new aggressiveness
and efforts to shore up the President's sagging conservative support. But others
contend that his ear-catching rhetoric is making the cautious George Bush look
even weaker. "It's a shame that Bush has to be compared to Quayle, but that's
his fault," says Stuart M. Butler, director of domestic policy studies for the
conservative Heritage Foundation. "Somebody has to take the lead."

TO MANY IN WASHINGTON, IT IS AS THOUGH Charlie McCarthy had suddenly bounded off
Edgar Bergen's lap and started to speak his own lines. Quayle had strong motives
for his act of self-liberation. If conservatives are important to Bush's
political base, they are all the 45-year-old Quayle has if he is ever to win the
Republican Presidential nomination he so clearly wants. And if the President's
staff, and perhaps even the President himself, get somewhat bruised in the
process, that does not seem to matter so much any more to Quayle and his
ambitious and increasingly restless aides, who share the Vice President's
appetite for conservative policies and big-splash news coverage.

As he wades into his new role as ideological point man, Quayle finds himself on
a tightrope. He must continue to be aggressive if he wants to put the past
behind him. But at the same time, if he comes on too strong or frolics in the
limelight too much, he could run afoul of carefully nurtured contacts in his own
party by upstaging the President. And that is one person Quayle cannot afford to
alienate. For a long time, after all, Dan Quayle had a constituency of one:
George Bush. "It's good for the President that Quayle's in a position to help
him with the conservative base," says Steven Merksamer, a lawyer in Sacramento,
Calif., and conservative G.O.P. operative. "It is not good for the President to
be compared unfavorably with the Vice President, and that is something Dan
Quayle does not want."

If anything has pushed Quayle to activism, it has been the emergence of Ross
Perot. The Vice President and his staff know that Bush's re-election, which for
now has been placed in jeopardy by Perot's strong challenge, is essential to his
own hopes of a White House run in 1996. "Quayle's chances depend 90 percent on
Bush winning and on him doing well in this campaign," says a senior Republican
strategist with close ties to Quayle. "This is do or die for Dan Quayle."

And yet Perot's presence in the race also provides Quayle with an unforeseen
opportunity. A Perot candidacy greatly increases the importance of the Vice
President's role in the 1992 campaign. In a three-way race, plurality, not
majority, rules. This puts the vote-getting emphasis of the campaign on core
constituencies, which Quayle's highly charged conservative rhetoric is designed
to galvanize. "It's a Quayle moment in the evolution of the Republican Party
when you're aiming at 39 percent and not 53 percent," says Kevin Phillips, the
political analyst.

But Phillips is quick to point out that a strong ideological campaign by Quayle
could spell trouble for Bush in the fall, as well as for the party in the
future. Not only would Bush once again open himself up to criticism for
abandoning his centrism in the heat of a campaign (which he might be less likely
to get away with than four years ago when he visited a flag factory and raised
the specter of Willie Horton), but the G.O.P. might end up too far to the right.

"What we have seen in recent weeks is the rise of Quayle as a force in setting
domestic policy, and possibly to the detriment of Bush in the medium term and
the Republican Party in the long term," Phillips says. "Quayle has an interest
in becoming an agent of the definition of the Republican Party in a way that
would reinforce his 1996 prospects. He's finding his stride in the narrowing
horizons of the Republican Party."

This may help explain Quayle's continuing decline in the national polls.
Quayle's advisers contend that he's had a hot hand since the Murphy Brown
blitzkrieg, but the numbers do not bear them out. In fact, the Vice President's
favorability ratings have slid from 33 percent last March to 20 percent in a New
York Times/ CBS News sampling in late June. Part of this may be due to Bush's
own plunge in the approval ratings, but part may reflect strong negative
reaction to the very polarizing effect Quayle has been trying to create. And for
all his new pugnaciousness, Quayle is still more than capable of pulling a
stunning boner. His recent mispelling of the word "potato" at a Trenton junior
high school spelling bee prompted Jay Leno to remark: "Maybe the Vice President
should stop watching 'Murphy Brown' and start watching 'Sesame Street.' " To add
insult to injury, Quayle's defense was that he'd been led astray by an errant
cue card.

Such setbacks aside, Quayle seems not at all discouraged about his bid to be be
taken seriously. Asked as he flew home from California how he felt about all the
attention, about being out on the front lines, Quayle squares his shoulders and
adjusts his Vice Presidential cuff links. "Good," he says.

CURTIS CRAWFORD, AN 18-YEAR-OLD IN t-shirt, baggy shorts and high tops, stands
in the parking lot of a bowling alley called Palm Springs Lanes, talking on a
pay phone. It is 5:30 on a spring afternoon, when a black limousine led by a
growling motorcycle escort pulls up. In the brick-oven heat of the California
desert, a man in white shirt sleeves, tie and black business shoes jumps out and
sticks out his hand. "Dan Quayle," the Vice President of the United States says
to Curtis Crawford.

Quayle says he likes to go to bowling alleys almost as much as he likes to play
golf. Bowling alleys, he explains, are where he finds his constituents. But
before going inside, the Vice President stops for a minute at the phone booth.
He discovers that Crawford is talking to his 15-year-old girlfriend, Amber.
Quayle grabs the phone.

"Hi, this is Dan Quayle," he says.

A pause. "It doesn't sound like my voice?"

Quayle covers the mouthpiece. "Should I ask her out for you?"

Crawford looks at all the television cameras, then at all the Secret Service
agents, then at the Vice President. He shrugs.

"Would you like to come out to dinner?" Quayle says into the phone. "No, you're
not coming out with me. With him."

This is a side of Dan Quayle that few people get to see. Much as he desires to
be treated with respect, there is still an insecure boyishness in him that makes
him want to impress a teen-ager outside a Palm Springs bowling alley. And he
remains far more at ease in these relatively private settings than when he has
to appear in public.

The Vice President still has trouble delivering speeches, even before friendly
audiences, even when his words are defiant. "Talk about right and wrong, and
they'll try to mock us in newsrooms, sitcom studios and faculty lounges across
America," he told the Southern Baptist Convention in Indianapolis last month.
"But in the heart of America, in the homes and workplaces and churches, the
message is heard." At the urging of his advisers, he has learned to give the
camera his profile instead of his startled, faded-denim eyes. But even when he
is hitting his favorite targets, like homosexual parents or the failures of
liberalism, his face looks set in stone.

Quayle is clearly trying to recapture the symbols of the Reagan era -- family,
religion, the flag, law and order -- but he has not yet mastered Ronald Reagan's
clarion-call delivery. His cadences and inflections are off, like a movie in
which the soundtrack and the pictures are not in sync. He sounds as if he is
basing his rhythms on punctuation, not the sense of the words. Moments like
these revive an old question: Does Quayle really have as strong a hand in
writing his speeches as he and his staff contend? Or does his obvious discomfort
suggest that he is just a mouthpiece for someone else's words?

Quayle's carefully drawn image also starts to blur as he moves out of the
right-to-life conventions and other sanctuaries of conservative Republican
politics. Five days after returning to Washington from the Murphy Brown trip, he
was at Arlington National Cemetery, delivering a Memorial Day address that he
tried to link to his new crusade for "moral values."

"As others flee responsibility, our military seeks it," he said. "As we walk
these paths, there is still a question that follows us. How? How did they find
the courage? How did men and women who valued life as much as we do so bravely
take their place in the long mysterious exodus of death?"

The Vice President's strong words only served to remind his listeners of the
unending questions about his own military record as a National Guardsman during
the Vietnam War. It is moments like these that make some of Quayle's friends
cringe. "It seems to me that the Quayle group is addicted to publicity for its
own sake," says one Republican strategist. "When they put him in a situation
where the audience is reminded of how he did poorly in school or didn't go to
Vietnam, things get pretty dicey. I wouldn't avoid them entirely, because you
can't, but I sure would low-key it."

THE QUAYLE STAFF IS anything but low-key. In fact, it is one of the leanest and
meanest operations in Washington. Led by the chief of staff, William Kristol, a
staunch conservative who relishes being described as "the kind of guy who likes
to throw Molotov cocktails," the key players on Quayle's team are as zealous
about staking out strong conservative positions as they are about promoting
their man's political fortunes. Whether they are pressing issues like space
exploration, legal reform, school choice or environmental deregulation, they
seem to take delight in administering a sharp dig to the ribs of their far more
passive, compromise-minded counterparts at the White House.

Some Republican strategists even suggest, by implication at least, that the
White House would do well to emulate the perpetually energized Quayle team.
"Quayle has an agenda," says Torie Clarke, the Bush-Quayle campaign's press
secretary. "He has a crack staff. They decide, here's what we want to
accomplish, and do it. They have objectives, they have strategies and they go
out and execute them."

Kristol, the son of the well-known conservative commentator Irving Kristol, is
the leader of the Quayle pack. A fixture at White House staff meetings, he is a
tireless advocate of conservative causes, constantly trying to push the
Administration to the right. Some observers see Kristol's distinctive hand in
the emergence of the "family values" campaign, as they had in Quayle's attacks
on the legal profession and his militant support of Israel. The 39-year-old
Kristol is a charter member of what one Washington conservative calls "the
little conspiracies of the right." This refers to Kristol's habit of staying up
into the wee hours taking phone calls from Representative Newt Gingrich of
Georgia, the conservative firebrand and House Republican whip. Not surprisingly,
Gingrich's ideas -- on subjects like how the G.O.P. can defeat the Democratic
Congress this fall -- often find their way into Quayle's speeches.

Another key player on the Quayle team is his press secretary, David C. Beckwith.
A former White House correspondent for Time, Beckwith has made the
rehabilitation of Quayle such a personal crusade that he appears to be
unceasingly at war with members of the Washington press corps. He regularly
fires off critiques of reporters' stories that are longer than the stories
themselves, and once accused the writer of an unflattering Quayle profile of
drinking on the job.

With the exception of Beckwith, who was hired on Bush's personal recommendation,
the Vice President can take credit for assembling his team himself. Jeffrey
Nesbit, the 34-year-old communications director, was brought in to join Quayle's
Senate staff in 1987. A former consumer advocate who worked for Ralph Nader,
Nesbit became a conservative convert after a solitary 25-day bicycle trip across
the country.

One key to Quayle's emergence as a force on domestic policy issues has been his
leadership of the White House Council on Competitiveness. Although the
three-year-old council has no statutory power, Quayle and his staff have turned
it into a genuine sphere of influence by focusing on conservatism's heartthrob
issue -- the excesses of Government regulation. While the White House hems and
haws over environmental concerns -- torn between Bush's vow to be the
"Environmental President" and his desire to please private industry --
environmental groups charge that Quayle's team has used the council to rewrite
the 1990 Clean Air Act.

The council's executive director, 34-year-old David M. McIntosh, cut his teeth
on the deregulation drives of the Reagan era and is now leading the charge to
make fundamental changes in 30 years of regulatory policy. It was McIntosh who
put together the Bush Administration's privatization initiative, which would
allow cities to sell assets that were built with Federal money (like airports
and bridges) to the private sector. And it was McIntosh who redrafted the
regulations of the Clean Air Act to allow companies to increase pollution
emissions without notifying the public. In the absence of a strong domestic
policy operation in the White House and of a cooperative spirit between the
Administration and Congress, Quayle's council has delighted conservatives
champing at the bit for a continuation of the Reagan policies. But it has
infuriated others. Democratic lawmakers are challenging the council's actions in
court, and 10 days ago the House Appropriations Committee voted 30-18 to
eliminate its financing entirely.

The talents, energies and strong personas that dominate Quayle's entourage keep
alive a question that has dogged the Vice President since 1988: To what extent
is he the product of his staff? It is widely recognized in Washington that
Kristol and the others exert a strong influence on Quayle. His detractors will
tell you it is the aides, not Quayle, who are responsible for whatever
visibility has been forged out of the largely invisible office of the Vice
Presidency. His supporters, however, argue that Quayle should be given credit
for hiring good people. They point out that, like many Washington politicians,
the Vice President sets the overall tone and lets staffers deal with the
details.

"He's a bit like Reagan in the sense that here's a man who does not claim to be
the great intellectual of the Administration," says Stuart Butler of the
Heritage Foundation. "He's comfortable with people around him who are smart."

Michael Sanera, a Reagan Administration official who now teaches political
science at Northern Arizona University, says: "I know Bill Kristol pretty well
and I tend to think a lot of what Quayle does is based on Bill's advice and
counsel. But Quayle is someone who has knowledge of conservative philosophy,
more than Bush ever did, and his record in the Congress was pretty good. Is Bill
Kristol supporting Quayle and making him look good? Or was Quayle smart enough
in the first place to pick Kristol to help him out? No leader can exist on his
own."

ON MAY 8, 10 DAYS before he delivered his Murphy Brown speech to the
Commonwealth Club of California in San Francisco, Quayle summoned his two main
speechwriters to lunch. He told John McConnell, a Yale law school graduate, and
the newly hired Lisa Schiffren, a former reporter for The Detroit News, that he
wanted a speech on urban problems to give in California. Quayle had been hearing
a lot from Republicans around the country about how weak the Administration had
looked in its response to the Los Angeles riots. The speech seemed like the
perfect time to put the conservative spin on the turmoil.

"The Vice President wanted to give a serious speech about the urban problem and
to focus on the poverty of values," Kristol says. "In our mind, it had a policy
purpose -- to advance the case for conservative solutions."

After the riots, Quayle's staff arranged meetings for him with two of the
leading lights of the neoconservative law-and-order movement: James. Q. Wilson,
the sociologist and criminologist at the University of California at Los
Angeles, who has written that a breakdown in values is the central cause of
urban civil unrest, and Charles Murray, the author of "Losing Ground," the
anti-welfare manifesto that had been required reading in the Reagan White House.
Quayle had also been reading Shelby Steele's "The Content of Our Character,"
which argues that affirmative action programs create self-doubt and
self-loathing among blacks.

At lunch, Quayle told his speech writers he was "very struck" by the connection
Murray and Wilson had drawn between South-Central Los Angeles and the breakdown
of family structure. One conclusion that came out of the lunch, according to an
aide who was there: "The upper middle-class can go through all this cultural
turmoil and emerge more or less O.K. The problem with the poor is that this is
not the case."

For months, Quayle and his staff had been on the verge of panic about the Bush
decline. From their perspective, the White House, despite major staff changes
since the beginning of the year, had let slip a series of opportunities to win
back the affection of American voters: the State of the Union Message in
January, the March 20 ultimatum to Congress to enact the Administration's
economic reforms and the Los Angeles riots. "For a while, it looked like the
President was going to get aggressive, but then all that fizzled too," one
adviser says.

Quayle, according to Republican strategists, decided to take action on his own.
"There's things Vice Presidents can say and do that Presidents should not say
and do," Quayle explained during one of our interviews.

As Quayle met with McConnell and Schiffren, he mentioned that he wanted to pin
the blame for the decline of values on Hollywood. It was a tried-and-true
conservative tactic: when in doubt, attack the liberals. Exactly who came up
with the Murphy Brown reference is in dispute. Some say it was Lisa Schiffren,
who eventually wrote the speech. Quayle later claimed he had thought up the idea
on his own, though he conceded he had never seen the show. Several Republican
advisers said the idea had actually come from Marilyn Quayle, who was said to
have been upset about the appearance of real-life anchorwomen at Murphy's baby
shower.

Whatever its genesis, Quayle was insistent that the Murphy Brown reference stay
in his speech. His aides were well aware that they were straying into dangerous
political territory, but no one expected the firestorm Quayle set off. Once
again, the barbs were brutal: "Quayle also says there should be more honesty on
television," Johnny Carson said. "He said there's no way a coyote could live
after swallowing all that dynamite."

The Vice President and his aides clearly had not thought through all the
political implications of his speech. During one of Quayle's first post-Murphy
interviews, Rollin Post, a political analyst for KRON-TV in San Francisco,
suggested that the Vice President's condemnation of childbearing out of wedlock
was strange coming from such a staunchly anti-abortion politician. Afterward,
Quayle seemed perplexed. "That's the first time I've heard that," he said. "It's
far-fetched."

But on the airplane out of San Francisco, Quayle and his staff huddled over the
unanticipated abortion issue and worked out a response. When Quayle landed in
Los Angeles, he went over to a group of waiting reporters to deliver it:
"Hollywood doesn't get it. Abortion is not the reason why we have a poverty of
values gripping our inner cities."

EVEN SOME OF QUAYLE'S most vocal critics concede that the disintegration of the
American family is an issue worth talking about. What bothers them is less the
sermon than the minister. "It isn't moral values that people laugh at, of course
-- it's Mr. Quayle himself, and it isn't the elite who do the laughing," the
humorist Garrison Keillor wrote on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times. "For
four years, Dan Quayle jokes have served to unite Americans of all walks of life
and all religious faiths." Others point out that as an heir to a newspaper
publishing chain, Quayle is hardly in a position to attack America's "media
elites."

But none of this seems to faze the Vice President, who continues to fly around
the country, giving tough, ideological speeches, expanding his target base
beyond Murphy Brown and Hollywood to the evils of sex education and New York
City and Ross Perot ("a temperamental tycoon who has contempt for the
Constitution of the United States"). Meanwhile, the White House and Bush
campaign team hang back, as though waiting to see the results of Quayle's
"market research"; then, once public reaction has been weighed, they selectively
take the Vice President's positions as their own. The same day that Quayle
knocked New York as a symbol of what is wrong with the country, Bush aides
visibly winced. They figure that New York State, with 33 electoral votes, is
going to be tough enough to win as it is.

The larger Quayle goal, of course, is to look Presidential. Quayle aides think
he's been flying high since The Washington Post's voluminous and respectful
seven-part series by David S. Broder and Bob Woodward earlier this year. ("Only
in Washington is Quayle considered a heavyweight," Keillor contends.) Although
it is widely assumed that Quayle is setting himself up for the 1996 election, he
will not yet brook any conversations on the subject. "I don't want to talk about
it, and I obviously won't, except in general terms, except to say that, look,
I've got to get through the 1992 election and we'll see where things stand after
that," he says.

But one question hovers over Quayle as he faces two key tests in the coming
campaign -- his speech before the Republican National Convention in August and
the Vice Presidential debates this fall. Can the Vice President continue to
serve two masters? Can he maintain his loyalties to the conservative
constituency he has so assiduously cultivated over the last four years, and at
the same time remain true to a President who is widely mistrusted by that
constituency?

"I think I really work hard to be loyal, perhaps even to a fault, to this
President and his policies," Quayle tells me in his office in the Old Executive
Office Building. He pauses. "Yeah, you can be, I suppose, loyal to a fault."

Loyalty, he says, has been the hallmark of his Vice Presidency. Leaning back on
a sofa, displaying the "J.D.Q." monogram on his heavy gold cuff links, he
repeats himself, slowly and with emphasis: "Loyal to a fault."

NAME: Dan Quayle

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover Photo: Vice President Dan Quayle (Edward Keating/The New York
Times); Photos: Quayle greets well-wishers just before his Murphy Brown speech
to the Commonwealth Club of California in San Francisco. "There's things Vice
Presidents can say and do that Presidents should not say and do," Quayle says.
(pg. 10); The Vice President arrives in Los Angeles and confronts the political
fallout from his Murphy Brown speech. How, Quayle was asked, could he reconcile
the Administration's anti-abortion policy with the attack on unwed mothers?
After the riots, Quayle's staff arranged for him to visit Hunter's View, a
public housing development in San Francisco. At Hunter's View, the Vice
President had coffee at the home of Vera Kennedy. The Vice President aboard Air
Force Two with two of his speech writers, John McConnell (far left) and Lisa
Schiffren (left), and his chief of staff, William Kristol. (Photograph by Jeff
Jacobson for The New York Times); Marilyn and Dan Quayle with Barbara and George
Bush as the President announced his bid for re-election in February. (James
Colburn/Photoreporters)(pg. 12-13); For David Beckwith, the press secretary,
defending Quayle has become a crusade. (Photograph by Jeff Jacobson for The New
York Times); For William Kristol, the chief of staff, the conservative cause is
all-consuming. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. 34)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NIGHT;
Catch a Jitney And Scream

BYLINE: By Bob Morris

SECTION: Section 9; Page 6; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1248 words


LAST Tuesday, Robert Pittman, the president of Time Warner Enterprises, and his
wife, Sandy, took a helicopter to Six Flags Great Adventure, which Time Warner
now owns. There, they met the friends and colleagues they had lured out of
Manhattan onto a specially chartered Hampton Jitney and into the humid New
Jersey night. They weren't just fooling around. They were marking the opening of
the Batman Stunt Show.

The boyish Mr. Pittman, a founder of MTV, calls the Batman Stunt Show a
Hollywood-scale extravaganza. In the tradition of Roman circuses, and like
demolition derbies and "Robocop" movies, it relies a bit heavily on the
entertainment value of pyrotechnics, explosions and engine noise.

Great adventures mean different things to different people, of course. Mr.
Pittman, for example, had just taken a motorcycle trip with 13 buddies,
including Jann Wenner, the owner of Rolling Stone. Mrs. Pittman, who flies
helicopters herself, was back from Alaska, where she climbed Mount McKinley
wearing a gold pendant for good luck that was made for her by Barry
Kieselstein-Cord.

"It was sublime; I felt very privileged to be up there," she said, recalling the
four body bags she saw being carried off the mountain.

After dinner, Mrs. Pittman was up for more adventures. "Who's going to ride the
Scream Machine?" she said. "Come on! Let's do it!" She roused some friends who
felt obligated to ride with her on the Machine, a notorious looping roller
coaster. Bill Boggs, who's afraid of heights and used to work with Mr. Pittman
on "The Morton Downey Jr. Show," discreetly lit out in another direction.

Also hiding out from the Pittmans was Jean Pigozzi, the portly Italian investor
who was a backer of Jackie Mason's Broadway show and is an owner of Spy
magazine. But with an hour and a half to kill before getting back on the jitney,
he felt obliged to take his date, Debbie Hagerty, a Wilhelmina model, on some
rides, too.

Their first stop was the coward's roller coaster. They were escorted by their
own private guide past a line of questioning faces to the front car, and while
she screamed with glee, he muttered "horrible" and "atrocious" at each dip and
turn.

"That was like a cab ride in New York," he said when they got off. "Except at
least here you know you're going to make it."

He followed the professionally slender Ms. Hagerty through crowds of people
wearing bright, loose-fitting clothing and eating cotton candy and ice-cream
cones. "Why lose weight and go to therapy when you can just come here?" Mr.
Pigozzi said. "These people make me feel like Richard Gere."

They passed a carousel. "Now there's a proper ride," he said. "Nobody's
screaming. Everybody's happy." They watched a crowd get off a ride that spins
people. "Nobody looks happy when they come off," he noted. He then asked a girl
if she'd enjoyed herself.

"Somebody threw up and they had to stop it in the middle," she told him. Mr.
Pigozzi, whose book of photographs "A Short Visit to Planet Earth" was published
by Aperture, snapped her picture.

"What an unglamorous way to die," he moaned aboard the Ferris wheel. "You want
to be on a private plane with Gianni Agnelli. That way, at least you get in the
papers."

"I get my thrills shopping at Bergdorf's," Ms. Hagerty said.

"Yes, but you never hear anybody screaming at Bergdorf's," he said. "I prefer to
be at home reading annual reports."

After the Ferris wheel, the only other ride Mr. Pigozzi considered was the Sky
Ride, which he said reminded him of a chairlift at a ski resort. Aloft, he
surveyed the complex architecture of the Scream Machine, counting its loops and
monitoring the screams of riders so he could tell Sandy Pittman he'd been on it.
"She's the kind of girl who would know things like that," he said.

Back on the ground, he walked around listing some rides he's been on in New
York. "There's the Chanel Ride," he said, "where they take your credit card
before you get on. There's the Hermes Ride, where you get whipped with belts and
ties. There's the Studio 54 Ride, where you wait and wait on line and can't get
in, and the Carlyle Ride, where you ride up and down in an elevator with more
and more people. Then there's the Amagansett Ride, where you walk through a
tick-infested dune and try not to get Lyme disease."

Around this time, Ms. Hagerty suggested that they return to the bus. "We won't
go on any more rides, honey," she said. "We'll just have lunch or something."

"That," he said, "I can do."

What's That Noise in the Boathouse?

One place it felt safe after dark on Monday was at the boathouse in Central
Park, where the American Foundation for AIDS Research held a benefit. It was
noisy with models, soap-opera actors, pop stars, blondes with architectural
eyebrows and men pushing the Versace look.

Super D.J. Dmitry from Deee-Lite was spinning records for a crowd that included
the television personalities Downtown Julie Brown and Ann Magnuson, the
performance artist turned sitcom star. It was a crowd that knew all about acting
out.

Juliet Hartford, a daughter of Huntington Hartford who appeared nude recently in
a Playboy spread called "Society Darlings," was looking relatively demure in
Chanel, although some people had words with her for cutting in line at the bar
earlier.

Eartha Kitt, who was blacklisted in the late 1960's for speaking out against the
Vietnam War at a luncheon given by Lady Bird Johnson, sang a little bit.

"She's a goddess," Mary McFadden said.

"My father thought she was the sexiest person alive," said John Fedel, a William
Morris agent. "Whenever she came on TV, you could just feel the electricity in
the air. I was just starting to understand sex at the time myself."

"There's no other Catwoman like her," said Rolanda Watts, the host of
"Attitudes" on the Lifetime cable channel. "I love her. She's a real pussycat."
Then, considering Ms. Kitt's history of outspokenness, she added, "Of course,
every pussycat has nails."

Ms. Kitt had only moderate success holding the audience when she sang "My Heart
Belongs to Daddy" and "I Can't Give You Anything but Love." Not her fault: she
performed with impeccable verve. It's just that many guests were more mesmerized
by the pants-dropping phenomenon Marky Mark, whose mere presence kept them from
focusing on the libidinous innuendo Ms. Kitt brings to her songs without taking
anything off.

After being interviewed by MTV, Mr. Mark was flashed at by overstimulated
photographers as excited at the photo opportunity as hunters sighting an
eight-point buck. Mr. Mark, in baggy shorts and a tank top, found himself face
to face with George Wayne.

Mr. Wayne, the Jamaican-born downtown gadabout, publishes R.O.M.E. magazine and
has been sued by Claudia Schiffer, the model, for publishing a photograph of her
topless. When he tried to ask Mr. Mark whether he had a significant other, he
got an icy "no comment" in response.

"He wouldn't answer me because I've been yelling at him to take his shirt off,"
Mr. Wayne said after the standoff. "Frankly, I'm shocked he didn't take
something off."

Under a modest madras blazer from New Republic, Mr. Wayne was wearing a pair of
khaki trousers with a small tear in the knee. "I probably ripped these on a
fence running from a lawsuit," he said, maintaining his humor about the future
of the magazine and the Schiffer settlement, which is pending. "If you're going
to be sued by somebody, it might as well be a super-model."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 766 words



International 3-11

CLOUDED ECONOMIC SUMMIT

Instead of reveling in the demise of Communism, leaders of seven major
industrialized democracies are expected to focus on economic stagnation and
ethnic violence at a meeting this week in Munich.  1

RUSSIA TO SEEK DEBT EXTENSION

Russia will ask major industrialized nations at their summit meeting for a
two-year moratorium on repayments of the former Soviet debt, President Yeltsin
said.  6

GRIM CHOICE IN HUNGRY ZIMBABWE

Faced with a devastating drought, officials at a park in Zimbabwe must kill
thousands of elephants and impalas so that other animals -- and hungry people --
can survive.  1

MONGOLIANS BLAME DEMOCRACY

Crippled by shortages of food and fuel, Mongolia misses its former Soviet
provider. And citizens are disenchanted with the changes wrought by a democratic
revolution.  3

HOW SERBIAN GUNNERS GET BY

An arms embargo against Yugoslavia has been thwarted by a clandestine flow of
arms into the area and huge stockpiles, officials say. 6

DODGING FIRE TO FEED SARAJEVO

United Nations peacekeepers braved shelling to unload and distribute planeloads
of rice, baby food and medicine in the Bosnian capital.  6

ANGRY CZECHS GAINING RESOLVE

News analysis: The rejection of President Havel's re-election bid shows that
nationalism among Slovaks has now been matched by a determination among Czech
politicians to divide the nation quickly.  7

National 12-18

PEROT AND VIETNAM

Trying to win the repatriation of any American servicemen still held in
Southeast Asia, Ross Perot urged the Reagan White House to begin limited
economic relations with the Vietnamese and expand diplomatic contacts with them.
His ideas were rejected.  1

Excerpts from a Perot letter to Reagan on the P.O.W. issue.  14

The Clinton campaign is in the best position since it began.  15

At a big stock-car race, Bush was just plain folks.  15

THE POLITICS OF WELFARE

Three decades after President Johnson declared war on poverty, two decades after
the Democratic platform enshrined "the rights of poor people," it is a sadder
but wiser nation -- some would say a poorer and meaner one -- that has changed
its approach toward welfare.  1

PRODUCING WITH FEWER PEOPLE

Many manufacturers working their way out of recession have no plans to recall
laid-off workers even if demand for their products grows ever more robust. It is
those policies that were reflected last week in the report that the unemployment
rate had spurted to 7.8 percent.  1

The economy's other losers: the elderly and their C.D.'s.  12

NEW FINDING ON WEIGHT LOSS

A four-year study concluded that prescription appetite suppressants could enable
obese people to lose weight and keep it off. Prevailing medical opinion had held
that drugs could not provide long-term relief from obesity.  12

RARE UNITY ON CAPITOL HILL

Congressional Memo: The lawmakers left town for the most patriotic of holidays
after their most bipartisan votes of the year. That unity on Thursday is worth
examining for its ingredients, because they illustrate what was there that day
and what is usually absent from the workings of the 102d Congress.  13

ON THE RUN

Lurking somewhere in the forested hills and gulches near the rim of the Grand
Canyon, a prison escapee with the cunning of a wild animal has been confounding
the authorities for almost two months.  12

Metropolitan 19-24, 28

SAILING FROM THE PAST

The world's largest gathering of tall ships in this century sailed out of the
past and through New York Harbor in a stately salute to Independence Day and the
500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's voyage.  1

DEMOCRATS AND PROTESTERS

The Democratic National Convention in New York is expected to play out before a
backdrop of protest the likes of which the nation has not seen since the Vietnam
War. With the drama of the streets competing for attention with that on the
convention floor, comparisons to the 1960's are inevitable. Yet the scope of the
protests and the variety of their demands could actually be wider.19

STARK DIFFERENCES IN HOUSING

The mostly white tenants of the Pomonok Houses in Queens while away summer
afternoons in aluminum lawn chairs, as children play along shady walkways and
neat courtyards. At the Astoria Houses, the largely black tenants encounter
rats, drug dealers selling crack and occasional gunfights. Such differences were
at the heart of a discrimination suit against the city.  19

Obituaries 26

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: July 4th was marked 184 miles above earth on Columbia.  17 (NASA
via Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot Told U.S. To Soften Policy On Vietnamese

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2423 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


As a way to win the repatriation of any American servicemen still held in
Southeast Asia, Ross Perot unsuccessfully sought to persuade the Reagan White
House to begin limited economic relations with Vietnam and to expand diplomatic
contacts.

At the time, Washington was taking a harder diplomatic line with Hanoi to
achieve the same end.

In a report to Ronald Reagan written April 8, 1987, after Mr. Perot returned
from Hanoi, the Texas businessman promoted several ideas, including the
establishment of a Vietnamese "economic representative" in the Swiss or Swedish
embassy, and a reciprocal American business office in Hanoi, a former Reagan
aide said. Mr. Perot also offered to pay for a Vietnamese delegation to the
United States to study American industries.

'A Small Price to Pay'

In a list of recommended future actions that accompanied his report, Mr. Perot
said he would finance an American tour for Vietnam's primary war hero, Gen. Vo
Nguyen Giap, as part of an overall plan of "good faith" gestures to Hanoi. Mr.
Perot said in his letter that the moves would be a "small price to pay" if they
led to the release of long-missing American prisoners of war. [Excerpts, Page
14.]

The recommendations were rejected by Mr. Reagan after Administration officials
argued that United States policy toward Hanoi should stay on course, requiring
Vietnam to meet its pledges to withdraw from Cambodia and clear up issues
relating to missing American servicemen from the Vietnam War era before the
United States considered diplomatic recognition and lifting the longstanding
trade embargo.

Fear of Manipulation

To a number of Reagan Administration officials, Mr. Perot's proposals raised
questions about his approach to foreign policy. Members of a committee
supervising policy toward Vietnam under the National Security Council criticized
the proposals because they granted "concessions without performance," several of
them said in recent interviews.

These officials were concerned that Mr. Perot's eagerness to make progress on
the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue was being manipulated by Hanoi's leaders, who were
seeking to use it as leverage to bring an end to their diplomatic and economic
isolation.

Commenting today on Mr. Perot's actions then, a senior spokesman in his
undeclared campaign for President said in Dallas, "The Administration had no
effective game plan" on Americans who were missing or were still held prisoner
in Southeast Asia.

He added that "Ross Perot was asked to develop one and he did so and delivered
it to the Administration," which he said was too preoccupied with the
Iran-contra scandal "to follow through and implement the plan."

The letter from Mr. Perot to Mr. Reagan is the most illuminating document that
has emerged so far from Mr. Perot's short-tenured service to the Reagan White
House as an unofficial reviewer of the Administration's P.O.W.-M.I.A. policies.

The document shows that Mr. Perot was seeking to place himself in the role of
broker of a new economic relationship between the United States and Hanoi as
part of his strategy to win the release of Americans he believed were still
being held.

"They are interested in direct assistance from the private sector, feeling that
the private sector knows more about business than the government," he wrote to
Mr. Reagan, adding parenthetically, "I believe this is their primary interest in
me." A few paragraphs later, he noted, "The Vietnamese have studied me in
detail."

At the same time, Mr. Perot said that he had explained to Vietnam's Vice Premier
and Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, "that it would not be possible for our
two countries to work together until the P.O.W./M.I.A. problem was resolved."

"He accepts this," Mr. Perot added, "but needs shows of good faith on our part."

Reagan Administration officials observed that Mr. Thach, the most pro-Western
member of Hanoi's politburo, appeared to be using his relationship with Mr.
Perot and the promise of economic development through such a relationship in an
internal power struggle with hardliners. Mr. Thach was forced to retire a year
ago.

Richard Childress, a former National Security Council official who was
supervising P.O.W.-M.I.A. policy at the time, said in a recent interview that
Mr. Perot's actions were "directly undermining" negotiations. His approach
"represents naive acceptance of a strategy of responding to the laundry list of
well-known Vietnamese objectives as if it would automatically bring
cooperation."

Mr. Childress said United States negotiators who went to Hanoi three months
later faced hostility from the disappointed Vietnamese.

Action Based On Deep Belief

Mr. Perot's letter to President Reagan reflect's Mr. Perot's blend of sharp
criticism of Government competence and his enthusiasm for action and Government
activism, if necessary, in support of a good cause.

In sparse and staccato sentences, Mr. Perot punched out his recommendations and
observations, leaving plenty of white space to accentuate his declarative
statements.

Mr. Perot, unlike Government officials, founded his recommendations on a deep
conviction that Americans had been left in Southeast Asia.

"We knew we were leaving men behind," he asserted. In Laos, he said "there are
343 M.I.A.s."

Reagan Administration officials said Mr. Perot's assertions did not take into
account the fact that at the end of the war some of those prisoners were
transferred to Hanoi for repatriation as part of a 1973 prisoner exchange, and
most others were under Vietnamese control.

Mr. Perot takes credit in his letter for having insinuated himself into the
confidence of Vietnam's leadership with a suggestion that Hanoi would not be
held responsible for long-missing P.O.W.s.

"I carefully postured the conversations so that the M.I.A.'s would be found in
Laos and returned by the Laotian government," he wrote to Mr. Reagan.

One member of the negotiating team was critical of this strategy. "There he is
inventing a strategy," he said, "without consultation with us, which is
destructive, because it narrows you to only one option. Asking the Vietnamese to
sell out Laos, a neighbor and a friend, is impossible. They are not going to
sell a neighboring country down the toilet."

In Sharp Contrast To Official Stance



Mr. Perot's proposals, had Mr. Reagan followed them, would have marked an abrupt
change in strategy. Washington's view was that Vietnam needed to make the show
of "good faith" by cooperating with American efforts to complete a final
accounting of Vietnam war dead.

"History has shown that concessions prior to performance is death," said Mr.
Childress.

"They'll take and take and take," he added. "We've learned that over 25 years."

Richard Armitage, who was in charge of the Pentagon's P.O.W.-M.I.A. efforts and
now serves with ambassador rank as director for aid programs to the former
Soviet Union, said, "Had we changed strategy and policy in the face of
non-performance of Vietnam, they would have felt that they had, yet again,
cracked the resolve of both the Administration and the American public. In
effect, they would have been rewarded for non-performance."

Mr. Perot had criticized Mr. Armitage's role at the time and had undertaken an
investigation of his private life.

Mr. Childress and Mr. Armitage agreed to comment on the letter only if it was
made clear that they did not provide the document and that they believe their
criticisms of Mr. Perot's approach were representative of the views of a broad
array of policy professionals in the Government.

A copy of Mr. Perot's letter and a memorandum of his discussion with a senior
Vietnamese official were provided to The New York Times by an official who is
not involved in any of this year's Presidential campaigns, but who believes Mr.
Perot should more fully disclose his dealings with Hanoi. In earlier interviews,
Mr. Perot has referred to the letter numerous times, but declined to make it
public.

"If I release the letter, hell, there's no telling what will be the next step,"
he said in a June 3 interview.

The course of United States policy, that Mr. Perot sought, particularly the
proposal to set up what would have been economic interest sections, was strongly
opposed by a special group under National Security Council supervision. The
group was pushing to elevate the P.O.W.-M.I.A. question to a higher priority
than it had had in the Nixon, Ford and Carter years.

This push followed the defection of a Vietnamese mortician who testified that
Hanoi had stored hundreds of sets of remains from American servicemen to use as
possible negotiating leverage.

Referring to Mr. Perot's offer to finance a visit to the United States by
General Giap, Mr. Childress said, "The fact that you would take an official at
that level -- he was still a member of the politburo -- and take him on a tour
around the country, is implicit recognition and sends all kinds of signals to
Vietnam and the world that we are recognizing them while they are occupying
Cambodia and not cooperating on the humanitarian front."

Talks Continued In Private Channels

The New York Times reported last month that Mr. Perot continued his dialogue
with Hanoi through private channels after his 1987 visit to Vietnam and after he
broke with the White House. In June 1990, Hanoi issued a letter designating Mr.
Perot and his company as official business agents to attract Western capital and
investment upon the lifting of the international trade embargo.

Mr. Perot said in an interview last month that he never wanted to do business
with Vietnam, and only discussed economic matters in a "philosophical" manner in
pursuit of his overall goal of winning the release of American servicemen.

"I could do business anywhere in the world," he said on an ABC News program with
Peter Jennings last week. "The last place in the world I would want to do
business is Vietnam."

When asked on the ABC News program what his associate, Harry McKillop, was doing
during a number of private missions to Hanoi between 1987 and 1991, Mr. Perot
replied, "He would respond to their request to come back in, listen, and come
home, and, I'm sad to report, nothing ever happened."

A senior Vietnamese official who participated in lengthy discussions with Mr.
Perot and Mr. McKillop over several years characterized Mr. Perot's goal as one
of becoming an intermediary between Hanoi and United States corporations seeking
to do business in Vietnam after the lifting of the embargo.

Perot's Clashes In Washington

Mr. Perot secretly visited Vietnam's mission at the United Nations in the winter
of 1986-87 without notifying the White House, Reagan aides said, securing an
invitation to go to Hanoi, which he then told Reagan officials had appeared "out
of the blue."

Arriving in Washington in 1986 as a strong ally of the Reagan White House, Mr.
Perot promised a lavish $2.5 million gift to Mr. Reagan's Presidential library
fund and promoted himself to head a Presidential commission on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
affairs. The commission, as he envisioned it, should be armed with subpoena
power and an open-ended charter to "get all the way to the bottom" of the
emotional national debate.

Within the space of a year, he was bypassed for the job. In the course of his
White House-sponsored investigations, he clashed with a wide range of officials
in the Pentagon, White House, Central Intelligence Agency and Congress over the
management of P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs.

A senior foreign diplomat in Washington said that in a recent conversation with
President Bush, Mr. Bush suggested that Mr. Perot's anger over not winning
appointment as the P.O.W.-M.I.A. policy chief could be a factor in his drive for
the White House this year.

Mr. Perot's estrangement from Ronald Reagan, including his withdrawal of the
$2.5 million pledge to the Reagan library, and his bitterness toward Mr. Bush,
then Vice President, has radiated into the current Presidential campaign.

Raised Expectations Back in Hanoi

At the time of Mr. Perot's proposals for "good faith" gestures to Vietnam,
Hanoi's aging rulers wanted to end the trade embargo and restore ties to
Washington.

United States negotiators were holding on to their leverage until Hanoi made
progress on a step-by-step "roadmap" to improved relations, through cooperation
on P.O.W.-M.I.A. investigations.

Referring to his discussions with Mr. Thach, Mr. Perot said, "Thach stressed
that we are always asking the Vietnamese to do things for the U.S., and that we
are unwilling to do anything for them."

At several points in his report to Mr. Reagan, Mr. Perot emphasized Vietnamese
frustrations. "Several times they commented, 'We won the war and yet you do not
treat us with respect.' They feel that we are rude and arrogant in our dealings
with them."

The official United States negotiating team that traveled to Hanoi three months
after Mr. Perot's March 1987 trip encounterd a hostile and deeply disappointed
Vietnamese delegation after Mr. Perot had raised expectations, several members
said.

The United States group, which included Mr. Childress, representatives from the
Pentagon and State Department and Ann Mills Griffiths, the director of the
largest organization of P.O.W.-M.I.A. family members, was sent by the White
House to prepare the way for the first visit of John W. Vessey Jr., a retired
general whom Mr. Reagan chose in January 1987 to be his Presidential emissary to
Hanoi for P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs.

The White House had not been willing to announce General Vessey's appointment
publicly until Hanoi agreed to an agenda dealing strictly with P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issues. But Mr. Perot had prematurely disclosed General Vessey's appointment to
the Vietnamese, Reagan aides said.

Mr. Perot said he had been given permission by Howard H. Baker, the White House
chief of staff, but Mr. Baker said he did not recall giving it.

By the time the United States negotiating team got to Hanoi, one member said the
atmosphere had been seriously muddled.

"When you lined up the things we were offering against the visit by Perot, who
was talking about setting up economic-interest sections in both capitals, all
that stuff we came up with must have looked penny ante to the Vietnamese," one
of the team members said. "That was our worst meeting in four years."

Ms. Griffiths said that given Mr. Perot's actions, "I am not surprised that
Vietnam continued to manipulate P.O.W.-M.I.A. responsiveness and hold out for a
better deal."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: While the Reagan White House was hardening its stand with Hanoi
in 1987, Ross Perot was trying to persuade the President to open trade with
North Vietnam as a means of encouraging the release of information on missing
servicemen. Mr. Perot, left, visited a prisoner-of-war camp in South Vietnam in
1970, where he talked with North Vietnamese prisoners as a goodwill gesture to
the Hanoi Government. (United Press International) (pg. 14)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Demonstrators Are Targeting The Democrats

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1798 words


In a year in which the trappings and structure of politics have paled in the
glare of voter resentment, the Democratic Party had hoped to seal its
Presidential nomination in a celebration marked by unity and calm. Instead, the
Democratic National Convention, which begins in New York a week from tomorrow,
is expected to play out before a backdrop of protest the likes of which the
nation has not seen since the Vietnam War.

With the drama of the streets competing for attention with that on the
convention floor, comparisons to the 1960's are inevitable. Yet the scope of the
protests and the variety of their demands could be wider, as more groups with
more agendas than ever before try to steal their spotlight from the Democrats.

"In the 1960's the fight was just for civil rights and against the Vietnam War,"
said Norman Siegel, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties
Union. "Now, there are a lot of wheels moving. Now, it's black, it's brown, it's
lavender and yellow and white. My sense is that it's going to be bigger, it will
be louder and it will be angrier than anything we've seen for years."

More than 20 groups representing hundreds of local and national organizations
have announced plans to hold demonstrations for issues like homelessness,
abortion rights, gay rights, civil rights, unemployment benefits, housing,
health care and police brutality. A conservative note will be added by Operation
Rescue, the national anti-abortion group that has vowed to shut down New
York-area abortion clinics while blaming the Democrats for ignoring the rights
of the unborn.

As of last Thursday, police officials had issued eight demonstration permits.
But at least as many more groups have vowed to join the fray. The job of keeping
the peace has fallen to Police Inspector Michael Julian. In a telephone
interview last week, he outlined police preparations and said police officials
did not fear widespread disorder. "These are all intelligent people with very
serious causes," he said. "What they want, and what they will get, is an
opportunity to be heard."

The only trouble he really expects is the battling-megaphone syndrome in which
two groups may want to shout their pain at once. In that event, the group with
the permit will be allowed to keep yelling, but those without will have to
relinquish their sound systems.

Logistics could also be a challenge. Mr. Julian said the police can move
"hundreds of thousands" of people peacefully through the city. Yet there could
be trouble if the groups move beyond police lines. "Ever since L.A.," said Mr.
Julian, "people seem to think that violence is a natural part of these things.
Look at the Gotti verdict. When did you ever see cars turned over in the street
because someone didn't like a verdict?"

Impact on Platform Unlikely

The protesters' impact on the Democratic platform is likely to be slight. Most
of the major issues have been decided. But the street-side jeering could steal
the convention's thunder and perhaps even some of its television exposure. More
troubling to party officials is the prospect that the protests' scope and
diversity could make a powerful statement about the level of voter rage in an
election year that increasingly holds that very anger as its central theme.

The irony for the Democrats is that the language of outrage was supposed to be
part of their message, one for them to send, not receive.

Protests are also expected in Houston, though on a much smaller scale. Operation
Rescue has announced it will be holding "rescues" during the Republican
Convention, and liberal groups may gather as well. However, the location of the
Houston Astrodome and police preparations for the event should keep
demonstrations small and far from the delegates.

In New York, the Democrats will have to fight the grass-roots coalitions outside
their doors to get their message across. And rather than the spontaneous
demonstrations in the 1960's, party officials will have to deal with
demonstrators well versed in media manipulation and armed with organizational
sophistication that often includes the presence of marshals whose sole job is to
keep the protests peaceful, orderly and legal.

"There will be 75 television trucks parked outside the convention hall," said
Mr. Siegel. "Activists know that New York is the theater capital of the world
and they are going to do their theater."

Most of the groups will arrive with speakers, posters and the standard
paraphernalia of politics. But like any great political campaign, there will be
surprises, too, and on the streets, a wacky side that transcends the standard
whistle and beanie indulgences of the convention floor.

Variety of Tactics

Lifting tactics from Act Up, the AIDS advocacy and protest group, and even some
refined by the Chinese during the Tiananmen Square upheaval of 1989, protesters
will press their cause with an array of approaches from the simplest sound bite
and slogan, to "fax zaps" and "phone zaps," intended to tie up convention phone
lines with an avalanche of incoming ire. Citywide "wheatpastings" should leave
almost every light pole, newspaper box, subway entrance and public space with a
message -- and an attitude. And candles will flicker quieter judgments at prayer
meetings of the homeless and those opposed to abortion rights.

The more radical of the groups intend to invade the convention hall itself. One
group leader who insisted on anonymity said her organization had obtained 25
floor passes from a friend within the Democratic Party, giving them open access
to the Garden. "We'll be doing something inside," she said. "But I can't say
what, because then the guards would know what to look for."

Act Up is almost certain to take a lead in aggressive tactics. "We are going to
be zapping the candidates," said Amy Bauer, an Act Up member. "There will
probably be confrontations in public, and also in private functions. We want
them to know that Act Up is watching, that we are paying attention."

'This Is Deadly Serious'

How will Act Up members gain access to the convention hall? Ms. Bauer said the
group's members would have no trouble getting in, and would dispense with some
of the wilder garb that has marked some of their protests in the past. "This is
deadly serious," she said. "The more attacks we can get in against George Bush
and the total lack of action on AIDS the better off we'll be."

The Women's Action Coalition, a new and rapidly expanding feminist group, has
scheduled a "W.A.C. Convention" on July 14, the night the city's museums are
opened to the Democratic delegates. Protesters will carry a banner putting the
Democrats on notice that there are "10 million more women who vote than men,"
and march down Fifth Avenue distributing leaflets with information on women's
issues and a list of demands covering economic equity, health care, child care,
violence against women and discrimination.

"We are going to have professional politicians getting these materials and we
wanted to really show them that we are out here, and we're angry and we're
informed, and we're going to pressure them," said Lindsay Walt, a member of
W.A.C.'s convention committee.

Surprising Success

B. C. Craig, a member of Act Up's 12-person Campaign '92 team that has organized
an AIDS march for earlier that day, said a coalition of more than 270 groups
will be represented there. They include such obvious supporters as health-care
providers and gay and lesbian organizations to less predictable allies like the
March of Dimes. Mr. Clinton and Jerry Brown have endorsed the group's five-point
platform, she said.

Some groups say they are astonished by their success at organizing. "This whole
thing just started as an idea," said Jasmine Griffin, an insurance company
worker who has helped organize the "Take Back Our Lives" march, scheduled for
July 13, to protest violence against women. "We put together a wish list of who
we'd like to have come speak. The incredible thing is that most of them said
yes!"

It is nearly impossible to predict the size of that and other rallies. Some may
only bring out a handful of people to chant and sing and shake their fists.
Others could draw anywhere from a handful of faithful to thousands of protesters
enraged at a system they no longer trust.

Police Brutality an Issue

On July 12, the Rev. Al Sharpton and other black leaders will stage a rally and
march to press the Democrats to endorse more black issues. He declined to
predict its size, saying: "I won't play the numbers game." But he added that
preliminary rallies are already being held in Harlem and elsewhere by black
leaders trying to call attention to the need for protest. "We just can't allow
the convention to come through here and have laryngitis about police brutality,"
Mr. Sharpton said Thursday.

While the demonstrations play out in the streets around the convention hall,
another, more familiar, drama is expected to stretch from Brooklyn to the Bronx.
Last summer, leaders of the anti-abortion group Operation Rescue said they would
use the convention week to stage their largest "rescue" ever, in an attempt to
shame the Democrats for their stand on the abortion issue.

Operation Rescue leaders have since indicated that activities around the
convention will be of a regional rather than national scope, and presumably
smaller than at first anticipated. But the group's telephone hot line on May 31
encouraged participants to "torture the Democrats" over the issue. Last week
some of the top leaders started to convene in Manhattan.

Daniel Brusstar, a coordinator of the Bi-State Operation Rescue Network, which
represents Operation Rescue in New York and New Jersey, said anti-abortion
protesters would hold a series of prayer meetings throughout the week and would
attempt to shut down abortion clinics.

"We want to try to bring attention to the reality of abortion, which is the
killing of an innocent life," he said.

Abortion-rights supporters have been preparing to meet that challenge for
months, and have received a surge of support themselves in the wake of the
Supreme Court decision to uphold most of the limits a Pennsylvania law places on
abortion. More than 2,000 volunteers have already been trained in a series of
meetings held throughout the region.

Efforts to block Operation Rescue teams are expected to be a $100,000
undertaking involving the establishment of a "clinic defense hot line," a
telephone bank operation designed to coordinate volunteers, and the printing and
distribution of a mountain of leaflets, posters and signs. It could be the
largest coordinated abortion rights effort in the history of the debate. It
could also be a sideshow in a city fascinated by its discontent.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Women's Action Coalition prepared banners
yesterday for protest activities planned during Democratic National Convention.
(Dith Pran/The New York Times)

Chart: "UNCONVENTIONAL TACTICS: Attracting the Delegates Attention"

Demonstrations scheduled for the Democtratic National Convention, which will
begin July 13 at Madison Square Garden. There is a designated protest area at
33d Street and Eighth Avenue.

July 10: FRIDAY

10 A.M. The Women's Action Coalition will display posters, artwork and other
materials to highlight abortion rights, censorship, age discrimination, housing,
education and violence against women at the base of the Brooklyn Bridge.

8:00 P.M. Fannie Lou Hamer Convention, designed as an alternative forum for a
coalition of religious, peace and race activists. Opens at the B'Nai Jeshurun
Synagogue, 205 West 86th Street, and continues through the weekend at the
Abyssinian Baptist Church 132 West 138th Street.

July 11: SATURDAY

1:00 p.m. Walk for Homeless Kids, sponsored by the Alliance Committee for the
Homeless, from Union Square to the Great Lawn in Central Park.

5 P.M. Prayer vigil held by the Bi-State Operation Rescue Network outside
Madison Square Garden.

7 p.m. Operation Rescue prayer rally at St. John the Baptist Church on West 31st
Street and Park Avenue.

July 12: SUNDAY

2:30 P.M. The Rev. Al Sharpton will lead a march from Columbus Circle to the
Hotel Intercontinental on East 48th Street, where Gov. Bill Clinton will be
staying.

7 P.M. Prayer rally by Bi-state Operation Rescue Network at St. John the Baptist
Church.

9:30 P.M. United Homeless Organization will hold a candlelight rally calling for
the Democrats to pay attention to homeless issues. The site will be at Chelsea
Park, on 28th Street and 9th Avenue.

July 13: MONDAY

4:00 p.m. Rally for the Homeless. Groups including the Hunger Action Network of
New York State, the Coalition for the Homeless and the Majority Coalition for a
New New York will hold a rally and host a soup kitchen at the Garden.

6:30 p.m. Take Back Our Lives March, sponsored by the New York Coalition to End
Violence Against Women, from Columbus Circle to the Garden. Speakers will
include Gloria Steinham, Ruth Messinger, Geraldine Ferraro, Liz Holtzman, Pat
Schroeder and victims of violence.

7 p.m. Prayer rally by Bi-state Operation Rescue Network at St. Agnes Church,
43d Street at Lexington Avenue.

July 14: TUESDAY

1 P.M. Demonstration by the National Association for the Mentally Ill at the
Garden.

1 P.M. United for AIDS Action march, with participants from 720 groups, from
Columbus Circle to Times Square for a 3 P.M. rally.

4 P.M. March of the Unemployed, from West 20th Street at Avenue of the Americas
to the Garden.

6 P.M. Women's Action Coalition march along 5th Avenue from the Musee del Barrio
to the Metropolitan Museum, coinciding with an open museum night for convention
delegates. The coalition will present its platform on abortion, women's rights,
child care and health care.

July 15: WEDNESDAY

1 p.m. United Homeless Organization march from Chelsea Park to Columbus Circle.

4 P.M. Unconventional Smoke-In, sponsored by the Yippies and Tompkins Square
anarchists, advocating the legalization of marijuana. A concert at Washington
Square Park will be followed by a march to the Garden.

July 16: THURSDAY

5 P.M. March against United States military aid to El Salvador from the
Salvadoran consulate, Park Avenue at 37th Street, to the Garden.

July 18: SATURDAY

10 A.M. TO 6 P.M. Movement for a People's Assembly plans a counter convention
and has invited protest groups to the Norman Thomas High School, 33d Street at
Park Avenue.

NOTE: Teams from Operation Rescue and the Clinic Defense Task Force are expected
to clash at abortion clinics throughout the city.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Excerpts From Perot's Letter to Reagan in 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words


Following are excerpts from a letter sent by Ross Perot to President Ronald
Reagan on April 8, 1987, on Mr. Perot's study of American prisoners of war in
Southeast Asia.

Dear Mr. President:

My findings on the POW/MIA study are as follows:

We left POWs behind at the end of the war in Vietnam.

We knew we were leaving men behind.

The men left behind were held in Laos.

The evidence that men were held in Laos is substantial --

*There are 343 MIAs in Laos.

*During the war, Pathet Lao officials repeatedly made public statements about
holding POWs, including statements made directly to me.

*The CIA listened to the Pathet Lao radio system during the war, and had
detailed information about live POWs in Laos. (During my trips to Laos during
the war, I was personally briefed on this point by the CIA.)

*At the end of the war, the Pathet Lao publicly stated that they would not
release the men until they received the money promised in the Nixon reparations
letter.

*The Paris negotiations with Vietnam did not include POWs from Laos. The
Vietnamese emphasize this point.

*The Pathet Lao never released any POWs directly or explained what happened to
the men they held. (A small number of men who were captured in Laos and turned
over to Vietnam for detention were released by Vietnam, along with the other
POWs.)

In the Spring of 1973, Congress decided not to pay the $3.25 billion President
Nixon had committed in his letter.

Watergate was underway, and our government was not functioning well.

In April, 1973, the Defense Department publicly declared that there were no more
living Americans being held in Southeast Asia.

*This is the most significant mistake made by our government on the POW/MIA
issue.

*This was done at a time when we knew we had left men in Laos (and probably in
Cambodia and Vietnam).

.  .  .

Several months ago, I recommended appointing a Presidential negotiator. I urge
you to appoint a personal representative to negotiate with the Vietnamese.
General Vessey is an excellent choice. He will have my full support.

POW/MIA family members and veterans groups will react positively to this action.

General Vessey must report directly to you -- not to the Secretary of State or
the NSC -- if he is to have the status needed to successfully deal with Vietnam.

General Vessey's role cannot be limited to recovering the POW/MIAs and remains.
This would make him ineffective with the Vietnamese. His role must be a broad
one -- to resolve the outstanding problems with Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

.  .  .

During my meetings with the Vietnamese, I carefully postured the conversations
so that the MIAs would be found in Laos and returned by the Loatian government.
This approach allows Vietnam to avoid criticism for having held the men.

Information regarding economic conditions in Vietnam and Southeast Asia and
other concerns expressed by Vietnam's leaders were conveyed to me during the
meetings. This may be helpful to General Vessey. Howard Baker has this
information, but I am not including it in this letter in an effort to keep it
brief.

.  .  .



 Best wishes,
 Sincerely,
 Ross Perot

Comments on Meetings With Foreign Minister Thach

.  .  .

Several times they commented, "We won the war and yet you do not treat us with
respect." They feel that we are rude and arrogant in our dealings with them.

They resent the fact that they continue to allow us to come into Vietnam to talk
with them about the POW/MIAs, and freely travel throughout their country -- and
yet, we do not reciprocate in the U.S. They are subject to a twenty-five mile
limit when they visit the UN. (Foreign Minister Thach was particularly sensitive
about this subject.)

.  .  .

"Your government declared your own men dead shortly after the war. How can you
expect us to take you seriously about looking for men who may be alive after all
these years. Why did your government declare these men dead right after the
war?"

The Vietnamese do not trust our government. They pointed out several times that
our government has not kept its promises. (It would be possible to get a list of
the promises they feel we have not kept.)

The current team negotiating for MIA remains is ineffective. The Vietnamese
believe they are minor figures in our government who have no authority, and can
only "make demands."

.  .  .

The economy is in bad shape. People are hungry. The soldiers are hungry and are
not always paid. Corruption is a serious problem.

The Vietnamese openly admit this. It appears to be their number one concern.

*They are reading economics books.

*They know they must change their economy, but they don't know what to do.

*They would welcome our help.

*They are most interested in direct assistance from the private sector, feeling
that the private sector knows more about business than the government. (I
believe this is their primary interest in me.)

They would like to have an economic representative from Vietnam in the U.S.,
studying how we do business. (This person could be located in either the Swedish
or Swiss Embassy, according to them, and would keep a low profile.)

They would like to be able to have teams come from Vietnam to the U.S. to study
specific industries. The Vietnamese economic representative would coordinate
these activities.

They would like for the U.S. to have economic representatives living in Vietnam.
This group could be operated privately, if the government does not wish to
become directly involved. The Vietnamese would prefer to have a private group
from the business world, because they would have more practical experience than
people from government.

The Vietnamese have studied me in detail.

They say conditions in the South are better than in the North.

These people have a great deal of pride, toughness, and willingness to endure.
We must be careful when dealing with them not to underestimate them.

.  .  .

I explained to Thach that it would not be possible for our two countries to work
together until the POW/MIA problem was resolved.

*He accepts this, but needs shows of good faith on our part.

.  ..

Thach, who is very shrewd, picked up on Laos right away, saying he was willing
to help us in every possible way in Laos. He emphasized that the Paris Treaty
did not cover U.S. POWs in Laos. He knew exactly what I was doing in focusing on
Laos (giving him a graceful out by having the men come out of Laos.)

He indicated a willingness to have U.S. teams in Hanoi, to conduct a full scale
search of their country.

He indicated a willingness to help us establish teams in Laos to conduct
searches of Laos.

After returning from this trip, I received word through an intermediary that a
senior Pathet Lao government minister wants to meet with me to "sell some POWs."
I doubt that it resulted from my Hanoi visit. It is a remote possibility, but I
will check it out.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 234 words



CAPTIVE WARRIORS
A Vietnam POW's Story.
By Sam Johnson and Jan Winebrenner.
Texas A&M University, $24.50.

Sam Johnson, who was elected to the House of Representatives from Texas last
year, was a career Air Force pilot. He flew 62 combat missions in Korea, then 24
missions in Vietnam, before he was shot down and captured in April 1966. He did
not get home for seven years. For most of that time, he and his fellow prisoners
were locked in tiny cells in Hoa Lo Prison in downtown Hanoi, known to its
American inmates as the Hanoi Hilton. They suffered torture, threats,
malnutrition and interrogation that was by turns brutal and seductive. They
survived only by a strong sense of discipline and a conviction that the United
States would not let them down. The lot of the prisoners of war in Vietnam is a
familiar story by now, and if it seems to belong to a time long past, the
retelling of the conditions evokes half-forgotten memories, the way hearing a
song from the 1960's does. In the course of conflict, governments do terrible
things to people, and reminders are important. However, in the case of "Captive
Warriors," written by Mr. Johnson and Jan Winebrenner, a freelance writer, the
strong message it should have delivered is diluted by clumsy, cliche-ridden
writing. It is a story that has been better told in the past, and that will be,
one trusts, better told in the future.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Should War Be Left to The Generals?

BYLINE: By Caleb Carr;  Caleb Carr is a contributing editor of MHQ: The
Quarterly Journal of Military History. His most recent book is "The Devil
Soldier: The Story of Frederick Townsend Ward."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1933 words



SHERIDAN
The Life and Wars of General Phil Sheridan.
By Roy Morris Jr.
Illustrated. 464 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $25.

A BATTLE FROM THE START
The Life of Nathan Bedford Forrest.
By Brian Steel Wills.
Illustrated. 457 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $30.

TO the everlasting misfortune of the United States, America's military tradition
-- its characteristic styles of command, strategy and tactics -- crystallized
not during the great gamble of the Revolution but during the butchery of the
Civil War. The years 1861-65 produced a set of commanders whose cults of
personality have had remarkable staying power, despite the very questionable
military, racial and social attitudes of almost all of them. Even more
dangerous, young American cadets and officers have consistently set these men up
as their role models. Thus American wars have continued and probably will
continue to be fought with the same abysmally heavy emphasis on attrition and
materiel, rather than creative thought, that marked both sides during the Civil
War.

The traditional attitude of historical analysts toward the War Between the
States has been similarly consistent and blinkered: Robert E. Lee, U. S. Grant
and their various subordinate commanders have been studied and restudied to an
extent difficult to reconcile with their limited ability to do much more than
persuade men to follow them into ill-advised engagements. Often the authors of
these studies, the Douglas Southall Freemans, Shelby Footes and Bruce Cattons of
the world, possess greater insight than the men they study. But they will not be
swayed from their admiring work; for those who study the Civil War, whatever
their intelligence, are as much addicts as scholars.

Two more authors, Roy Morris Jr. and Brian Steel Wills, have entered the ranks
of this traditionalist school with their biographies of a pair of men who are
generally considered to have been the best cavalry commanders on their
respective sides of the war. Mr. Morris's "Sheridan: The Life and Wars of
General Phil Sheridan" follows the trail of the compact, frenetic Union horseman
who was the scourge of the Shenandoah Valley, while Mr. Wills's "Battle From the
Start" is a life of Nathan Bedford Forrest, the legendary slave trader and
raider who harassed William T. Sherman's lines of supply during his march
through the South.

THE two commanders were remarkably similar: both rose from junior rank and
almost total obscurity with amazing speed to command enormous, nearly autonomous
bodies of raiding cavalry. Both were violent, intolerant, prejudiced men who
went on after the war to lead two of the more brutal military and paramilitary
campaigns in American history: Sheridan was commander of the Army of the West,
which oversaw the destruction of the Plains Indians, and Bedford Forrest became
Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, which terrorized and murdered many Southern
blacks who were impertinent enough to believe that the Civil War had changed
anything.

Mr. Morris comes from a journalistic background (he is editor of the magazine
America's Civil War) while Mr. Wills is a professor of history at Georgia
Southern University. Mr. Morris enjoys the advantage of a more polished and
accessible style, and does not offer the kind of thorough, in-depth research
that Mr. Wills does; but in every other respect their books, like their
subjects, are remarkably similar. Both are steady, workmanlike jobs that cannot
be seriously faulted until we reach the realm of authorial point of view.
Unfortunately, the problems in this area are deep and disturbing.

To Mr. Morris, "power, more than anything -- its getting, keeping, wielding, and
extending -- was what Phil Sheridan was all about." Mr. Wills, meanwhile, states
that Bedford Forrest was "a man, living in the context of his times and shaped
by forces over which he ultimately had no control." For both writers, larger
social and military issues are basically left at that: Mr. Morris and Mr. Wills
focus in detail on the military achievements of their subjects, heightening the
value of the two commanders by comparing them to many of the even less talented
officers who peopled the higher ranks of the Union and Confederate armies.

All this is in the mold of traditional Civil War histories, and would not have
seemed cause for concern 40 or even 30 years ago. But military and social events
of the last three decades -- the civil rights and American Indian movements, as
well as several questionably conducted wars -- make it difficult indeed to
accept the traditional view of men like Sheridan and Forrest in our own time.

To begin with, the campaigns of both commanders, including what have always been
considered their most "masterly" victories, were of little or no strategic value
for all their drama. Sheridan was certainly more than capable of rallying his
men with front-line theatrics, as at the famous battle of Cedar Creek in 1864,
where only Sheridan's sudden reappearance after a temporary absence kept the
Confederacy from gaining a late but important victory. He was also a master of
burning civilian property, as in the Shenandoah Valley; but much of that
destruction was excessive and brutal. (Even the true master of burning and
looting, William T. Sherman, himself admitted that only a small amount of his
army's destructiveness -- about 20 percent -- was of any real military value.)
As Mr. Morris acknowledges, Sheridan never seriously attempted the one
strategically significant operation he was called on by both Grant and Sherman
to undertake: severing Robert E. Lee's vital lines of supply during the final
stage of the war.

Similarly, Bedford Forrest succeeded in making his name synonymous with terror
to soldiers and civilians in the Western theater of the war, not only through
daring raids but also by allowing (if not actually ordering) his men to execute
many prisoners, primarily black soldiers, whom the former slave trader never
regarded as anything other than chattel. The most infamous of these incidents
occurred at Fort Pillow, Tenn., in 1864. But Forrest proved unequal to the task
of cutting Sherman's supply lines and strangling the decisive March to the Sea.

Thus the military achievements of the two men remain of little historical value,
for all that Mr. Morris may talk of "the sheer magnitude of [Sheridan's] success
in the Shenandoah Valley" or Mr. Wills may perpetuate the image of the "Wizard
of the Saddle," Bedford Forrest.

BUT if Sheridan and Forrest's military significance was negligible, their racial
beliefs and policies (justifiably considered criminal by many at the time and in
ensuing generations) helped mold corrosive social attitudes whose effects we
still feel acutely today. And as both Mr. Morris's and Mr. Wills's books purport
to be biographies rather than narrow military studies of the two commanders, we
have a right to expect both authors to address these issues seriously. Their
attempts to do so, like their examinations of the military campaigns, would suit
the world of 30 or 40 years ago more than that of today.

It may be true that Phil Sheridan never said, "The only good Indian is a dead
Indian," but rather, "The only good Indians I ever saw were dead"; but it is
difficult to understand the assessment of this latter statement as, in Mr.
Morris's words, "more a joke than a philosophy." It was, after all, backed up by
many years of near-genocidal campaigning on the frontier.

Similarly, Mr. Wills ultimately accepts Shelby Foote's rather inexplicable
statement that Bedford Forrest "was certainly not the villain they [modern black
Southerners] perceive him to be." How can blacks not perceive Forrest as such,
when the man made his fortune trading in slaves, was one of the founders of the
Klan and continues to be admired by otherwise intelligent Southern whites?

Such sentiments as those voiced, with whatever minor qualifications, by Mr.
Morris and Mr. Wills are particularly disturbing in the light of recently
renewed American Indian protests and national racial strife. In addition,
American military exploits from Vietnam to Iraq owe not a little of their
tactical overkill and strategic ineptitude to the legacy of men like Sheridan
and Forrest. Given all of these developments, it is not unreasonable to ask that
biographies of these figures, while documenting their Civil War careers, give us
greater insight into those activities that have had more lasting, if far more
tragic, effects: the perpetuation of ethnic hatred and the formation of
America's stunningly unimaginative military tradition.

The pre-eminent military genius of the late 19th century, Helmuth von Moltke --
creator of Prussia's (later Germany's) modern general staff and architect of
that nation's rapid victories over Denmark, Austria and France -- viewed the
American Civil War as a horrifying collision of armed mobs. Sheridan and Forrest
were particular experts in that style of warfare. But what did they, in turn,
think of von Moltke? If Forrest ever heard of him Mr. Wills does not mention it;
but Sheridan accompanied the Prussians during their war against France in 1870
as a military observer. "I saw no new principles developed," Sheridan commented
of the most innovative and important war of the late 19th century, "whether of
strategy or grand tactics." On another occasion, confounded by the reluctance of
the Prussians to deal sternly with French guerrillas and civilians, Sheridan
told Prussia's Chancellor Otto von Bismarck that "the people must be left with
nothing but their eyes to weep with over the war."

Unfortunately, because of the work of men like Sheridan, Forrest and those who
admire them, many people in the United States still have sound cause to weep.



THE VIEW FROM THE RANKS

In February 1862, Pvt. Wilbur Fisk of Tunbridge, Vt., wrote to The Green
Mountain Freeman, his hometown newspaper: "If you have given our superiors room
in your columns to tell their story, on behalf of the privates, I plead the
privilege of telling mine. I think the privates ought to be represented in the
press even if the representation be a poor one, because we are largely in the
majority and have the burden of the work to do." Fisk then began a
correspondence that lasted until the end of the Civil War, collected in HARD
MARCHING EVERY DAY: The Civil War Letters of Private Wilbur Fisk, 1861-1865
(University Press of Kansas, $25), edited by the independent scholars Emil and
Ruth Rosenblatt. Fisk served with the Second Regiment of Vermont Volunteers, and
his letters tell not only of his experience at Gettysburg and the many battles
in Virginia, but also of his regiment's role in New York City during the draft
riots of 1863. His descriptions of combat are colorful, but most of his letters
describe the minutiae of soldiering. He tells of marching hither and yon and
back again; camping in fair weather and foul, and the hurry-up and wait familiar
to soldiers of all generations. What may be surprising is just how literate a
man Fisk was and what a firm grasp he had on the events of his day. An appendix
consists of three speeches by Fisk, on Decoration Day 1891, Decoration Day 1894
and before a gathering of Grand Army of the Republic veterans, also in 1894. He
reveals how little his ideas had changed in the 30 years that had gone by since
his soldiering days. Fisk remained committed to the necessity of the Civil War
and the cause it sustained to the very end. Altogether this is a rich collection
of Civil War letters. -- JOHN GLENN

NAME: Phil Sheridan; Bedford Forrest

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Brig. Gen. Phil Sheridan at the end of 1862; Maj. Gen. Nathan
Bedford Forrest, about 1864. (U.S. Army Military History Institute)(pg. 21)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Candidate's Core Curriculum

BYLINE: By Paul Burka;  Paul Burka is executive editor of Texas Monthly
magazine.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


In a film version of H. G. Wells's novel "The Time Machine," the 19th century
time traveler takes three books with him on his final return to a distant future
where primitive people live without books or knowledge. The reader is left to
guess what those books might be.

Ross Perot is in much the same situation. A few weeks ago, he announced that he
would devote more time to studying issues. What, one wonders, is his reading
list? What new knowledge will he take into his future?

It would be simple enough to assemble a list of influential public policy books
for Mr. Perot to read: Kevin Phillips's "The Politics of Rich and Poor," Robert
Reich's "The Work of Nations," William Greider's "Who Will Tell the People" and
so on. But are the lessons of policy books really what Mr. Perot most needs to
know? He may not be fluent in the specifics of issues, but he has shown an
intuitive understanding of the nation's fundamental problems.

He has shown less understanding, however, of the eternal truths of politics: the
uses and limits of power, the interaction of policy and personality, the
relationship between credibility and trust, the difference between right and
wrong. The more we learn about Ross Perot, the more it is apparent that these
are the kinds of issues that will ultimately determine whether he can be elected
President.

Here is a reading list that would enhance his appreciation of politics.

1. "All the King's Men," a novel by Robert Penn Warren (1946). Moral: The ends
do not justify the means.

Gov. Willie Stark practices what Machiavelli preached. He wants to do good, but
when doing good turns out not to be so easy after all, he resorts to corrupting
his friends and blackmailing his enemies. "It takes dirt to grow grass," Willie
says. To persuade an idealist to work for him, Willie argues that goodness can
be made only from badness. But two can play this game. When the idealist's
illusions are shattered, he puts Willie's philosophy to work by assassinating
him.

2. "Antigone," a play by Sophocles (circa 442 B.C.). Beware of hubris, the sin
of overweening pride.

Ross Perot is not afflicted with self-doubt. Neither was Creon, ruler of Thebes.
"The man the state has put in place must have obedient hearing to his least
command, when it is right and even when it's not," he proclaims. Sure enough,
Creon has issued a wrong command: the corpse of a traitor must be left unburied.
But Antigone, sister of the traitor and fiance of Creon's son, defies him, and
Creon is determined to ignore all pleas for clemency. The inevitable
consequences of his arrogance are the suicides of Antigone, his son and his
wife. "The gods must have their due," the chorus intones. "Great words by men of
pride bring greater blows upon them."

3. "The Best and the Brightest," by David Halberstam (1972). Experts don't know
everything.

The men John F. Kennedy brought to Washington were the best and brightest --
"brilliant men," Mr. Halberstam writes, "men of force, not cruel, not harsh, but
men who acted rather than waited." Does this sound like anybody we know? Ross
Perot presents himself as a can-do man of action, and he relies heavily on
bringing in elite experts to brief him.

But this combination of expertise and love of action is exactly what led America
into the quagmire of Vietnam. The experts failed to factor public opinion into
their neat theories. Even Lyndon B. Johnson, who ought to have known better, was
so awed by the best and the brightest that he ignored the warning of his friend
Sam Rayburn, the House Speaker: "I'd feel a whole lot better about them if just
one of them had run for sheriff once."

4. "The Butter Battle Book," by Dr. Seuss (1984). Don't try to destroy people
who disagree with you.

Yooks eat bread with the butter side up, but, "In every Zook house and in every
Zook town, every Zook eats his bread with the butter side down!" This difference
is enough to make each side want to annihilate the other, and to build ever more
sophisticated weapons to do so.

As a cold war parable, this children's book is flawed, because the differences
between the Yooks and Zooks were not so trivial. As a general indictment of
feuding, however, the book has a message for a potential President with a
penchant for vengefulness: Be sure what you're fighting over really matters.

5. "Character: America's Search for Leadership," by Gail Sheehy (1988).
Character is a legitimate political issue.

Character is destiny, Ms. Sheehy believes, and these profiles of six
Presidential candidates and Ronald Reagan try to prove it. The book would drive
someone like Ross Perot nuts with its street-corner psychology but at least it
explains the media's current fascination with a candidate's past: "We need the
cold slap of insight to wake us up from the smoothly contrived images projected
by highly paid media experts," Ms. Sheehy writes.

The best argument for character-cop journalism is the prescience of the fourth
profile: "If George Bush cannot bear to offend people, if he hasn't got the
outer strength to pursue a lonely course, if he feels wholly comfortable only
when being liked, might he not, as a president, become paralyzed?"

6. "The Company," a novel by John Ehrlichman (1976). Political spying is a
two-edged sword.

Ross Perot has a long history of hiring investigators to spy on people,
including President Bush. As President, could he resist using the F.B.I., the
C.I.A., the I.R.S. and other Federal agencies against his political enemies?
This novel by a convicted Watergate figure might make him think twice about it.

The President and the Director of Central Intelligence are locked in a power
struggle filled with snooping, surveillance and intrigue -- and the loser is the
President. "The people are wholly fictional," Mr. Ehrlichman writes in an
author's note. "But the forces -- the stresses, pressures, fears and passions --
that motivate the characters are real."

7. "In Defence of Politics," by Bernard Crick (1962). Politics is compromise.

College students will recognize this one. It's mandatory reading for Poly Sci
101 almost everywhere. The author, a British political scientist, describes
politics as a process of discussion -- in other words, compromise. It produces
progress out of dialogue and preserves both freedom and social order by bringing
everybody to the bargaining table.

"There are two great enemies of politics," Mr. Crick writes: "indifference to
human suffering and the passionate quest for certainty in matters which are
essentially political."

8. "Lady Chatterly's Lover," a novel by D. H. Lawrence (1928). Lighten up, Ross.

There are two sides to everything -- even adultery.

9. "Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life," by Sissela Bok (1978). Tell
the truth.

Why does Mr. Perot waffle, backpedal and even deny when confronted with
controversial positions and statements he has made in the past? He ought to
realize by now that he is far more likely to lose the Presidency by lying than
by telling the truth.

Mrs. Bok, who has taught ethics at Harvard and Stanford, argues for
truthfulness. "A society whose members were unable to distinguish truthful
messages from deceptive ones would collapse," she writes.

10. "The Politics of Upheaval," volume three of "The Age of Roosevelt," by
Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. (1960). How to be a successful President in a time of
crisis.

Start by being committed to people, not ideology. F.D.R.'s "basic principle was
not to sacrifice human beings to logic," Mr. Schlesinger writes. "He had no
philosophy save experiment, which was a technique; constitutionalism, which was
a procedure; and humanity, which was a faith." Then, conduct yourself in a way
that sets an example for the country. If Ross Perot is elected President, he
could ask for no better judgment from future historians than the valedictory Mr.
Roosevelt receives at the book's conclusion: He made it possible for people to
believe again in Government's capacity to solve problems of economic stability
and social justice.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

METRO MATTERS;
The Curative Power of Celebrations

BYLINE: By Sam Roberts

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


THE summer of 1976 was a Prozac moment in the emotional life of New York City.

Celebrating the nation's Bicentennial and playing host to a Democratic national
convention for the first time in 52 years infused New Yorkers with a euphoria
that seemed to purge the depression induced the year before by New York's brush
with bankruptcy and, earlier, by Watergate and the Vietnam War.

The Bicentennial celebration and the convention also "added to the city's
self-image and to its perception by worldwide investors," the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey later concluded, and heralded Manhattan's economic
revival.

"I think the same sort of circumstances that prevailed then prevail now," says
Rosemary Scanlon, the Port Authority's chief economist.

The city is mired in an economic and an psychological slump, much like it was 16
years ago. But it is arguable whether the spirit of '76 will prevail again or
endure.

The current slump is more prolonged than the one that was triggered in 1975 when
a fiscal crisis was precipitated by a single factor -- the refusal of banks to
lend the city any more money. The economic and social causes and manifestations
of the latest decline are more amorphous. They have provoked neither the same
degree of crisis nor inspired the same urgent solutions.

In 1976, few people were ambivalent about the Bicentennial celebration, even if
women and blacks had reason to question the "all men are created equal" part.
Response to Columbus has been more equivocal. The political climate has demanded
a more inclusive celebration -- though not quite so broad as to include an
Arab-American who, after referring to New York as "Ziontown," was dismissed last
month from the Mayor's official Columbus committee.

Since the Bicentennial, the city has thrown two other big birthday parties: the
100th of the Brooklyn Bridge and of the Statue of Liberty. New Yorkers are not
partied out, but the novelty may have worn off.

The same may be true about another party, the Democrats. They convene here next
week (Goodbye Columbus, Hello Clinton) for the second time time since 1976,
which was the first time they returned to the scene of their disastrous 1924
marathon.

Delivering a rousing nominating speech that year, Franklin D. Roosevelt invoked
Wordsworth in dubbing Gov. Alfred E. Smith of New York "the Happy Warrior." But
virtually nobody, Governor Smith included, was happy when the convention finally
nominated John W. Davis on the 103d ballot. (In a rare display of boosterism --
"Hickville on the Hudson," William Allen White dubbed the city -- the New York
press reported that while 254 people had been treated in Madison Square Garden's
emergency hospital, only one had died).

The 1976 convention produced the last Democratic President. Four years later,
the Democrats returned to re-nominate Jimmy Carter, who, that November, became
the last Democratic incumbent to be defeated for re-election.

This year, more delegates attended several other conventions in New York than
are expected at Madison Square Garden next week, but few New Yorkers noticed the
influx of tens of thousands of motorcycle or variety merchandise enthusiasts.
Still, a political convention, like the breathtaking tall ships, can bring out
the best in a party.

"A political convention blows in and out like a 90-mile gale," James A. Farley,
the Roosevelt-era Democratic leader, once said. Nowadays, the same volume of
wind is generated, but it usually blows like a zephyr. Also, New York's
influence has diminished since 1924 when William Jennings Bryan warned: "You New
Yorkers are always forgetting that there is quite a bit of country outside of
this state."

If the convention is successful, local politicians hope the euphoria will last.
Mayor David N. Dinkins is already on a roll, but his once and future Republican
rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani, recently suggested that just being able to balance a
budget and to keep the city from burning should not merit Mr. Dinkins's
re-election next year. In 1977, though, despite the euphoria generated the year
before, Mayor Abraham D. Beame was defeated -- in part because he was perceived
as having failed both those very tests.

Whoever wins next year will end his, or her, four-year term on the eve of still
another anniversary -- the 1998 centennial of the consolidation of Greater New
York. The spirit that year may depend on whether Staten Island and Queens have
seceded from the city. Also, on whether the fact that Andrew H. Green, the
father of Greater New York, was later shot to death while entering his Park
Avenue home is recalled smugly or with alarm as evidence of how far the city has
progressed in a century.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Lives of Unexpected Poverty In Center of a Land of Plenty

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2802 words

DATELINE: MARSHALLTOWN, Iowa


This city of 25,000 sits amid cornfields and factories in the center of a state
that has been riding out the recession with one of the lowest unemployment
levels in the country. Yet around 2,000 poor people here are getting help of
some kind from the welfare system, from vouchers to heat a house to a regular
welfare check.

This is not the South Bronx or Appalachia, where poverty often is attributed to
culture or behavior, to racism or reckless childbearing.

But Marshalltown shows with unusual clarity other powerful forces that make
welfare and poverty hard to escape anywhere: the nation's proliferation of
low-wage jobs and two decades of falling wages, especially for the least
skilled, in terms of what they can buy.

Working, but Still Needy

Diana Kuchenreuther, 34 years old, single, the mother of three children, has
been working for two years and trying to get off the dole, but she is still
desperately poor. Her home is an apartment in a big rundown house in a
working-class neighborhood. Her entrance is on the side, over a concrete slab
cluttered with two wobbly kitchen chairs and the jetsam of children.

Inside, the drain of the sink in the one bathroom hasn't worked for a couple of
years, and the toilet leaked until a friend patched a crack in the bowl. The old
carpet on the staircase is foul and torn. The upstairs ceiling leaks in the
rain. The place has two bedrooms, one for Ms. Kuchenreuther, Phillip, 9, and
Aimmee, 7, the other for Lucinda, 13. The rent is $260 a month.

Most Outside Cities

Although dependence on welfare is concentrated in inner cities, a majority of
recipients live in suburbs, small towns like this one and rural areas around the
country. And although black and Hispanic people receive welfare out of
proportion to their numbers, more white people, including Ms. Kuchenreuther,
spend time on it than members of any other group.

Some common patterns of welfare are evident here. Ninety-one percent of the
Marshall County households that receive Aid to Families with Dependent Children
are headed by women, many of them victims of abusive or runaway men. Forty
percent of the women on welfare in Iowa had their first children as teenagers,
and 16 percent dropped out of high school.

But no one can blame racism for poverty here. Ninety-eight percent of the 38,000
people of Marshall County, of which Marshalltown is the seat, are white, as are
nearly all the families on welfare.

In big cities and the rural South, welfare and poverty might feed on themselves
in spreading through neighborhoods. Here, poverty stays indoors. Marshalltown is
not rich, but it is barren of slums, and the poor live next to the middle class.
The crime and drug problems of the inner cities are, by comparison,
insignificant here.

Being on welfare in Marshalltown seems less the hassle it can be in big cities.
From the center of downtown, people can walk to the various welfare offices and
complete their business in an hour or two. A sign at the reception desk of the
human services office tells clients to complain if they wait more than 15
minutes.

Feeling the Stigma of Welfare

But there is also less room to hide. Case workers keep close tabs on their
clients, and with more jobs available than in big urban centers, they go to some
length to prod them to work. People on welfare here say they also contend with
the stigma of dependence in the asides of their neighbors and in the glances of
shoppers in the supermarket checkout line when they pay with food stamps.

Ms. Kuchenreuther and other people interviewed are at various stages of the
struggle with poverty, welfare and the low-wage economy. She is paid $4.80 an
hour as a nurse's aide. She often works up to four hours of overtime a day and
earns as much as $350 a week. She no longer receives a cash welfare grant, but
she remains eligible for $177 a month in food stamps, and she is in line for a
Government-subsidized house that should cost her no more than she pays now.

Ms. Kuchenreuther said she loves working and caring for the elderly. But she is
trapped by her wages. "People say, 'Why don't you move out of this house?' " she
said. "I can't afford to."

She said she wants to become a registered nurse, which would pay $12 an hour.
But that means a couple of years of full-time schooling, giving up her work and
going back to living almost entirely on welfare.

The attitudes of Ms. Kuchenreuther and other welfare recipients interviewed here
run from defiant and confident to defeated and lost. Two are aiming for
well-paid jobs that would free them from welfare. The prospects for the others
are less certain.

Christine Anderson
A Temporary Tool To Earn a Degree

For Christine Anderson, 25, the welfare system is not a permanent crutch, but a
tool to escape the quicksand of a life of low-wage jobs. She wants to be a
social worker.

With the aid of welfare and a Federal grant for college students from families
with low incomes, Ms. Anderson has spent a year at Marshalltown Community
College working toward a two-year associate's degree. With high grades so far,
she hopes to keep getting grants and subsidies and eventually earn a master's
degree in social work, which could lead to a job paying enough to support
herself and her daughter, Burgundy.

Ms. Anderson, who was born in Wisconsin, moved in with her father in Des Moines
at 11 after her parents divorced. At 13 she was sent to her father's parents in
South Dakota, who sent her to a Seventh-day Adventist boarding school near
Bismarck, S.D. She was valedictorian of a class of 17.

'An Irresponsible Thing'

Lacking money for college, she became a hostess in a restaurant and took up with
a waiter. "I did an irresponsible thing," she said. "I got pregnant." She said
the waiter fled to Colorado. She took a job at another restaurant in Lincoln,
Neb., had her baby, enrolled at the University of Nebraska and lasted a month.
"I didn't know about welfare," she said. "I was trying to work, go to college,
pay a baby sitter and breast-feed my baby."

She went to Topeka, Kan., and found a job as a receptionist with an engineering
firm. In three years, she was making $7.50 an hour.  But fighting bulimia, a
severe eating disorder, she moved to Marshalltown to be closer to her mother and
in 1989 enrolled in the welfare system.

The system has helped her take control of her life, she said. Her apartment is
bright and clean. In her living room, she has 12 potted plants, her 6-year-old
daughter's toys tucked in corners and school drawings on the wall. "I do not
present myself as poor white trash," she said.

No Telephone, No Sofa

But there are many things Ms. Anderson does not have, from a corkscrew to a
sofa. She does without a telephone. She changes the oil in her car herself. If
short of cash for gas, she gets it with food stamps: if the change due on a food
stamp purchase is less than $1, merchants pay in money, so Ms. Anderson goes
from store to store buying 5-cent mints, accumulating enough coins to buy gas.

She feels the stigma of being on welfare -- she receives $361 in A.F.D.C.
payments a month, $118 in food stamps, a subsidy of $199 on her monthly rent of
$303, and Medicaid. When she prepares to pay in the supermarket, she keeps the
food stamp book in her purse as she tears out the coupons.

"Someone on my softball team was bitching because I was too tan," she said. "
'Oh, I forgot, Christine, you don't have a real life,' she said. That was
someone who got a free car when she got married and gets free rent from living
with her in-laws."

She is irked that she lets it get to her. She worked for more than four years
and paid taxes. "I don't feel guilty about taking your money," she said. "I'm
not taking your money. I'm taking my own."

JoAnn Earnest
A Refuge In Bad Times

JoAnn Earnest, 37, and Roger Bunting, 31, together for two and a half years, say
they want to be self-sufficient. He has just started a business, and she would
like to start one. But they find the economy blowing against them and the
welfare system a refuge.

"I'm tired of all this," Mr. Bunting said. As an able-bodied male without
children, he is ineligible for welfare, but he benefits from the help Ms.
Earnest gets.

"Nobody should get nothing for nothing," he said. "Russia was a welfare state
since 1917, and look what it got them." But it is hard to get along without it,
too. "In the winter," he said, "we don't make nothing. She's the one that makes
everything happen then."

$50 for Child Care

Most mornings, Ms. Earnest gets up at 5 o'clock. A woman who works in a
meat-packing plant brings in her mildly retarded 6-year-old son. Ms. Earnest
watches the boy for $50 a week, income she reports to the authorities. The boy
curls up with his blanket on the living room rug, and Ms. Earnest goes back to
bed for an hour or so. Then she gets up and puts on one of her three pairs of
pants.

"I could use some more pants," she says. Her shoes are one of two pairs she
wears. She has another pair she doesn't use, high heels that she bought on sale
for $5.

She awakens Brandy, her 3-year-old daughter by another man, and then gets up Mr.
Bunting if he has any work to do. Since quitting a job making pallets that paid
the state's minimum wage of $4.65 an hour, Mr. Bunting has invested in three
dump trucks for less than $2,000 to start a business.

He runs advertisements in a local paper. One says, "Hauling and Odd Jobs." The
other says, "Black Dirt." The black dirt, good for gardens, comes from the
35-acre back yard. "Want to see a rural ghetto?" he said, gesturing out a back
window. Mounds of metallic debris and vehicles parts obscure the view of the
property, which is owned by Mr. Bunting's father.

Mr. Bunting said that one month recently he earned four times what he could earn
from the minimum wage. But in June, he said, he made nothing at all. In times
like that, Ms. Earnest is the sole source of income. Besides her pay from
watching the boy, she and Brandy are allotted $200 a month in food stamps and
$357 a month in A.F.D.C.

The Mid-Iowa Community Action Program, a service for the poor that is financed
in part by the Federal Government, provides about $40 a month in food coupons
for Brandy under the Federal Women's, Infants and Children program and vouchers
for part of the heating bill. It also insulated the house.

Not Afraid to Work

Brandy turned three on June 18, a threshold age for the youngest child of
parents on welfare in Iowa. At that point, parents are beckoned to the state's
job service for counseling and possible placement. If they do not show up, they
can lose all but the food stamps and A.D.F.C. that their children need.

Ms. Earnest said she is not afraid to work. Earlier, while rearing three other
children -- daughters 18 and 19, and a son, 21 -- she worked in nursing home as
a housekeeper, in a garment factory and in a woodworking shop. All the jobs paid
less than $5 an hour, but living was easier then.

She had a husband who was a machine operator in a factory. But he went to jail
in 1983 for burglary, and she went on welfare for three years. They are
separated now and he is somewhere in in South Dakota. She said she went back on
welfare a few months before Brandy was born because her doctor told her the
varnish and paint fumes in the wood shop could endanger her pregnancy.

She wants a better job than before, running a day care business or another
skilled job. But she could face a long haul. She stopped school in the ninth
grade, and before training for a well-paid job, she would have to get the
equivalent of a high school diploma.

Yvette Anderson
Fleeing a Spouse, Finding Welfare



After three years on welfare, Yvette Anderson, 33, is a year from vaulting out
of the system to a much improved standard of living. A nurse's aide for 10 years
before she had children -- daughters aged 3 and 2 by her former husband and a
2-month-old son by the man she sees now -- she set out to become a registered
nurse. Next May she expects to complete her training.

Ms. Anderson, who is not related to Christine Anderson, can then expect to earn
the $12 an hour that nursing here pays to start. She would also collect the $329
a month that her former husband is paying in child support. For now, the state
keeps all but $50 to offset the $272 a month she receives in food stamps and
$426 in A.F.D.C. In all, she would receive about $29,400 a year, about $1,000
above the median income for a family of four in Iowa and well above the poverty
line.

Ms. Anderson said leaving her heavy-drinking husband put her on welfare. "I was
five months pregnant. I was scared to death of him. He'd say, 'If you don't shut
your mouth, you're going to find yourself picking yourself up off the floor.' "
She said she felt worthless then.

She is the eldest of seven children. She said her mother, now married to her
fifth husband, was on welfare more often than not. She said she would not repeat
the pattern. "I had no choice. I could live with an alcoholic or get out."

She puts the stigma of welfare out of her mind. "I don't care what people think.
And if I have a temporary setback and I have to use the system, that's my right,
as a previous taxpayer and a future taxpayer."

Glenda Schmidt
Shaky Prospects, Uncertain Pay



Glenda Schmidt, 39, did the right things to get off welfare, getting trained for
a job and taking a one as a nurse's aide. But hers is not only a low-wage job.
Like many of the economy's newer jobs, it is part time and irregular. She never
really knows when she will she will be beckoned to work.

Mrs. Schmidt fits one stereotype of women on welfare but not another. She has
five children, ages 9 to 23, which has qualified her for A.F.D.C. and food
stamps on and off, depending on her husband's success with his work. Under a
special program in Iowa, parents, married or not, can get A.F.D.C. if both are
at home, one or both are unemployed, and at least one has been working.

On the other hand, she has had a long and stable marriage, after one that lasted
seven months and produced her first child. Every day she carries a lunch to her
her husband, Robert, who is 43, at the garage where he is trying to start a
machinery repair business.

Mrs. Schmidt seems weary and worn sitting in front of a large television console
in the living room of her small, rented brick house. She said Mr. Schmidt bought
the television in better times. Because she works, her benefits were cut, and
now her big concern is how she will pay for the family's medicine when the
Medicaid coverage that came with welfare ends this fall.

She now pays only $1 for each prescription. She takes medicine for an inflamed
stomach, for anxiety, for hypertension and migraine headaches. Until a couple of
months ago, she was taking an antidepressant. The Schmidts' 9-year-old daughter
needs medicine for a urinary problem that alone costs $180 a month. Mr. Schmidt,
who has had three heart attacks, takes nitroglycerin. But he is a Vietnam War
veteran, so he gets free medical care.

Anxiety of Uncertainty

Mrs. Schmidt's anxiety arises in part from trying to wean herself from welfare.
Several years ago she went to school to learn to be a nurse's aide. Last
October, she landed a job at a local hospital that pays $5.77 an hour and about
50 cents more for night work. The work, however, is unpredictable, and she does
not take the hospital's health benefits because they would cost her $53 a week,
or half her pay many weeks.

In April, she earned $700 because she worked overtime filling in for a
co-worker. One week in June, she earned $114. The next, she earned $108. The
third she earned nothing. "They called me and said I didn't have to come in,"
she said. When that happens the welfare system helps out, but only after some
paper-processing delays.

At the end of June the Schmidts had $300 in bills, for rent, light, garbage
collection and telephone service, and nothing to pay them with. She still
receives food stamps, $209 in June, but her $495 in A.F.D.C. was cut off the
month after she started work.

She scrimps. "I don't buy lipstick," she said. "I don't buy fingernail polish.
Now shampoo, that's a necessity. I get that for 89 cents." She drives a 1979
Plymouth Horizon to work, but it has problems with its gears, and the emergency
brake is unreliable. The car is not insured.

Mr. Schmidt has been a truck driver for years, but needs less stressful work
because of his health. But business for his new repair business is slow, and he
may have to give it up.

"I guess I worry if I'm doing things right," Mrs. Schmidt said.

                             --------------------

Next: When welfare pays better than work.


LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Rethinking Welfare -- Third of six articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Diana Kuchenreuther sitting with her 7-year-old daughter,
Aimmee, on the porch of their apartment in Marshalltown, Iowa. Ms. Kuchenreuther
has been working for two years, trying to get off the welfare roles, but she and
her family are still desparately poor.; After three years on welfare, Yvette
Anderson is a year from completing her nurse's training and moving out of the
system to a much improved standard of living. Ms. Anderson watched her daughter
Jamie run through their apartment in Marshalltown. (Photographs by Jeffrey Davis
for The New York Times) (pg. A16)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Promise and Betrayal Of the American Dream

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 900 words



Motor City
By Bill Morris
337 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.

The year is 1954, and what's good for General Motors is supposed to be good for
the country. There are faint rumblings, far away, in a place called Vietnam, and
Joseph McCarthy is noisily looking for Communists, but it's the marriage of
Marilyn Monroe and Joe DiMaggio that dominates the tabloid headlines. Elvis is
on the verge of his first big break, the McDonald brothers are starting a chain
of hamburger stores, and Jack Kerouac and Neal Cassady are preparing for their
adventures on the road. In Detroit, automobiles are about to sprout fins and
menacing bumpers as the folks at rival car companies struggle to capture the
imagination of the American people.

In his energetic first novel, Bill Morris, a columnist for The Greensboro News
and Record in North Carolina, wants to do two things. He wants to tell the story
of the men and women who work at a fictionalized version of the Buick design
division: the story of their private hopes, dreams and romances. He also wants
to use their story to illustrate the promises and betrayals of the American
Dream, and in doing so, give the reader a comprehensive portrait of American
life in the 50's.

The Buick part of his story begins, simply enough, with a bumper. It seems that
the front bumper of the new Buick Century -- a bumper "that looked like it could
scoop dead cows off the road, a silver slab punctuated by two sharply tipped,
mammiferous bulbs" -- has been stolen by the designers at Plymouth. At least
that's what Ted Mackey and Harvey Pearl, Mr. Morris's fictional Buick
executives, think. They decide to take some McCarthyite measures to find the
leak.

The phones in the Buick design division are bugged and lists of suspects are
compiled. Ted also takes it upon himself to personally cultivate a spy. His
choice is Claire Hathaway, a beautiful young designer who's working on the new
Buick Century and who uncannily reminds him of his wife, Milmary, when she was
young. Claire reluctantly agrees to try to ferret out some information, less out
of company loyalty than out of a growing attraction to Ted, the company's
so-called great white shark.

Will Lomax, a former reporter who has just become Buick's top public relations
man, is dismayed by his bosses' behavior. Although he had prided himself on
being unshockable, "this time he had underestimated the automobile industry's
capacity for savagery." For years, Will has been planning to write "The Book," a
scathing tell-all account of the Buick division, but now he's afraid he has too
much at stake in the company himself. He has mixed feelings when his best
friend, Morey Caan, a muckraking journalist from Washington, arrives in town to
do a story on the Buick division's latest design.

Writing in crisp, engaging prose, Mr. Morris does a wonderful job of introducing
these characters in the early chapters of "Motor City." He has the same gift
John Updike displayed in his "Rabbit" novels, a gift for delineating his
characters' inner lives while at the same time making their dilemmas emblematic
of impulses in American society at large. He is a vigorous, nimble writer, and
by cutting back and forth between various characters' stories, he's able to
immerse us in a well-upholstered fictional world.

We get caught up in the thrill -- and as described by Mr. Morris, it actually is
a thrill -- of readying a new automobile design for production, and we also get
caught up in the personal dramas of his characters' lives. Ted's affair with
Claire; his wife's determination to write fiction; Will's growing ambivalence
toward his job; Morey's decision to investigate the Buick division: all are
smoothly dramatized.

Unfortunately, Mr. Morris is not content to let his characters' individual
stories speak for themselves. Rather, he periodically switches to a wide-angle
lens that he hopes will comprehensively capture the mood and concerns of America
at mid-century. Toward this end, he begins shoehorning bigger and bigger issues
into the main narrative: Harvey Pearl, for instance, falls in love with a woman
horribly disfigured by the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima. At the same time,
Mr. Morris also starts introducing more and more famous people in cameo roles.

Unlike their counterparts in E. L. Doctorow's "Ragtime," these celebrities don't
really interact with the other characters, they just have annoying walk-on
roles. Ted talks to Marilyn Monroe about doing a Buick promotion. Claire
corresponds with Vladimir Nabokov. Morey interviews Joseph McCarthy and
President Eisenhower and investigates stories involving people like Robert
Oppenheimer.

Such encounters with symbolic figures of the 50's multiply toward the end of the
novel, and they begin to feel increasingly preposterous and contrived. Not only
do these scenes distort the shape and symmetry of the book, they also seem to
have diverted Mr. Morris from the original story he set out to tell. Indeed, the
fates of Ted, Harvey, Milmary, Claire, Will and Morey are hurriedly tied up, as
Mr. Morris spends more and more time performing narrative contortions to
introduce people like Elvis Presley and Jack Kerouac.

It's a disappointing conclusion to a book that got off to such a roaring good
start. Given the abundance of Mr. Morris's talents, it seems unlikely that he
will make a similar mistake in his next novel.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bill Morris (Marion Ettlinger/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Polls;
Older Americans Are Found More Alienated Than the Young

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


Older Americans express much more alienation than young people do nowadays about
politics and Government and are much more willing to run risks for the sake of
change.

That is the central finding of a poll conducted a month ago and made public
today by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press. It is one of the
most thorough surveys ever conducted of the differences in attitudes and
political views of various generations of Americans.

"On almost every measure of evaluation, the post-New Deal generations voice more
criticism of politics, business and Federal bureaucracy than do people who came
of age in the '60's, '70's or '80's," the center reported in a summary of its
findings.

Academic experts said the new poll underscores how much generational attitudes
have changed since the days when young people were protesting the Vietnam War
and demonstrating on college campuses and their parents were defending the
status quo.

Change for the Over-50 Voters



As an illustration of the willingness to take political risks, about two-thirds
of those over the age of 50 who were surveyed by the Times Mirror Center said
that new leaders were needed now in Washington "even if they are not as
effective as experienced politicians." Fewer than half the people younger than
30 took that position.

Three-quarters of those polled over the age of 35 but only half of those under
25 said things run by the Government were "usually inefficient and wasteful."
Approximately the same proportions said, "The Federal Government controls too
much of our daily lives." Older people also were more likely to say that
business profits are excessive and that Government regulation usually does more
harm than good.

There was no firm indication that these differences in attitudes would affect
this year's election. The poll showed that potential voters supported President
Bush, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Ross Perot in more or less the same
proportions regardless of age.

But the poll's directors said the findings suggested that voter turnout might be
higher in November than it has been in recent Presidential elections because of
the maturation of the baby-boom generation and the interest in politics stirred
up by the independent candidacy of Mr. Perot.

The survey, conducted May 28 to June 10, involved 3,517 telephone interviews
with adults nationwide. More people were interviewed and more questions were
asked than is normal in public opinion surveys. The margin of sampling error was
plus or minus two percentage points.

'Gap in Attentiveness'

The poll's directors indicated that one reason that people over 50 seem so much
more dissatisfied than those who are younger is that older Americans pay much
more attention to Government and politics. For example, about half of those over
50 knew that a majority of senators and representatives are Democrats, while
only one person in five under 25 and a quarter of those from 25 to 29 knew that
fact.

"There is a much greater gap in attentiveness to news events today than you see
if you look at polls in the past," said Andrew Kohut, director of surveys for
the Times Mirror Center, who used to be president of the Gallup Organization.

Martin P. Wattenberg, a political scientist at the University of California at
Irvine, said it no longer surprised him but continued to dismay him that young
people exhibited such ignorance about politics. "It used to be, 'Don't trust
anybody over 30,' " Mr. Wattenberg said. "Now it's, 'Don't ask anybody under
30.' "

Still, young people do seem to pay more attention than their elders to certain
kinds of news. About two-thirds of those under 30 knew, for example, that
"Murphy Brown" was the television program Vice President Dan Quayle criticized
for glamorizing unwed mothers. Less than half of those 65 and older knew that.

Richard G. Niemi, a political scientist at the University of Rochester who has
written often about generational attitudes toward politics, said he thought the
different perspectives of older and younger people resulted from the fact that
the older ones "recall the time when things were very different, very much
better, when the United States was the top dog."

On the matter of voter turnout, the poll's directors observed that by and large
the older people are the more likely they are to vote, and they said that as the
large number of people born shortly after World War II enter middle age, they
can be expected to vote at the same rate as middle-age Americans in the past.


LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Looking for New Ideas" shows percentage of adults by age group
who agreed with the statement: "We need new people in Washington even if they
are not as effective as experienced politicans." From a Times Mirror poll of
3,517 adults conducted May 28 to June 10.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Journal;
The Life of an Anarchist Captured on Microfilm

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., July 7


When her Irish Setter bounded into a guitar shop with her, Candace S. Falk, a
young graduate student, thought she would get an unfriendly reaction. Instead
the store-owner stroked the pet and asked its name. The answer sent him hurrying
down to the store's basement to fetch an abandoned box of letters signed by the
dog's namesake -- the turn-of-the-century anarchist "Red Emma" Goldman.

Ms. Falk's discovery, in 1975, of that boot-sized box filled with letters
between Emma Goldman and her lover, Ben Reitman, led her to begin a 12-year
research project that was completed last month at the University of California
at Berkeley.

Goldman was "an advocate of free speech, women's issues and world peace," Ms.
Falk said, so "the perfect place for a historical project on Emma Goldman was,
of course, Berkeley."

"There's such a range of politics in Berkeley that even in a time when
'politically correct' is so caricatured, people here resist clumping everyone on
the left together," she said.

Over the years more than 100 graduate students, professors and, in Ms. Falk's
words, "elderly anarchists" have been involved in collating the material for
publication. It is now available, fully annotated, on 69 reels of microfilm at
13 libraries nationwide, including the New York Public Library and the Olin
Library at Cornell University. Ms. Falk also plans to publish the highlights in
a book.

Working out of a small, bright bungalow, the Emma Goldman Papers team tracked
down, read, dated and indexed some 40,000 documents from all over the world. The
walls are lined with copies of newspaper articles, legal documents, cartoons and
photographs of a serious, dark-haired woman wearing pince-nez and a
high-collared shirt.

This woman, who was born in 1869 in Lithuania and died in 1940, wrote as many as
a dozen letters a day. The collection contains more than 18,000 letters she
exchanged with prominent figures of the early 20th century, including Albert
Einstein, H. G. Wells, the birth-control advocate Margaret Sanger and Roger
Baldwin, who later said Goldman had inspired him to found the American Civil
Liberties Union.

As a student at the University of Chicago in the 1960's, Ms. Falk was protesting
the Vietnam War when she first heard Goldman's name. Reading Goldman's 1931
autobiography, 'Living My Life,' Ms. Falk discovered a kindred spirit who had
opposed the draft during World War I.

Many of the student researchers "find something in Goldman that resonates with
who they are," the 44-year-old Ms. Falk said, "whether they are socialists and
feel like outcasts, or gay and want open sexual expression." Goldman addressed
these issues, and also spoke out on topics like free love, birth control and the
eight-hour work day.

Rachel Rivera, 31, worked on the Goldman papers while a graduate student in
journalism at Berkeley. "With all the debate over government censorship and
intrusion," she said, "I often think how great it would be if she were around
today."

Some Berkeley students not involved with the project have had the chance to
appreciate it, and even contribute. At a talk Ms. Falk gave on Goldman, Kirin
Contractor was moved by the story of this controversial woman, and wrote of it
to her mother in the Indian Himalayas. Her mother replied with the news that Ms.
Contractor's grandmother had been good friends with Goldman and that they had
exchanged many letters. After sitting for years in a trunk in the Himalayas,
those letters are now included in the collection.

After the recent riots in Los Angeles, a consortium of 28 Los Angeles high
schools asked the Berkeley team if they could develop a Goldman curriculum, one
that would show how Goldman maintained a vision of hope while expressing the
alienation felt by a marginal member of society. It has just been completed.

After giving a talk on Goldman at an Oakland high school this year, Ms. Falk
took out a bag of buttons quoting Goldman: "The most violent element in society
is ignorance."

All 50 students, she said, went away wearing Emma Goldman's words.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Fewer Homeless in View Before Convention

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1437 words


In a Texas twang, Richard Brockaway said he was homeless and had no use for the
likes of George Bush, Bill Clinton or Ross Perot. But as he sat panhandling
across Seventh Avenue from Madison Square Garden recently, the 64-year-old
former cook displayed a keen sense of the political.

He spelled his name "B-R-O-C-K-A-W-A-Y-P-O-T-A-T-O-E." And he said that when the
Democratic National Convention moves in next week, he expects he will have to
move out.

"I figure they will tell me, and I will just move for five or six days and then
come back," said Mr. Brockaway, who sits for eight hours each day on a tan milk
crate at West 34th Street. "Because part of what it's about to be free is taking
orders from people. I believe it's a necessary thing."

As the convention nears, many homeless people seem to be taking Mr. Brockaway's
tack. The city and other authorities have said there will be no sweeps of the
homeless and there appears to be no overt effort to chase them away. But by a
number of measures, including counts by advocates for the homeless and
interviews with homeless people, there are already fewer homeless people, in all
their squalor and symbolism, around the Garden.

Inside the Garden yesterday, Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic national chairman,
said the homeless illustrated what he called the failure of an administration
with no clearly defined domestic policy. But he said that homeless people near
the Garden during the convention were not within his jurisdiction.

"I will be dealing on issues like that with the Mayor," he said.

The Democrats also said that a 10-member honor guard of homeless veterans would
present the colors and lead delegates in saying the Pledge of Allegiance at the
opening session on Monday. The contingent will come from the New England Shelter
for Homeless Veterans in Boston and will include men who fought in World War II,
Korea, Vietnam, the Grenada invasion and the Persian Gulf war.

"We were looking for a way to make a positive statement," said Ken Smith, the
director of the shelter. "There are more homeless veterans now than at any time
since the Civil War. That's unconscionable. All these guys ever wanted to do was
come home." The city's convention planners, meanwhile, held a briefing for
reporters about events for the delegates when they are not in session next week,
from a Broadway revue to a fashion show in Central Park.

A convention in New York carries a special resonance because it was the
convention sweeps here 12 years ago that galvanized advocates for the homeless
and served as a catalyst for the formation of the Coalition for the Homeless.

"I think it is just unseemly," Norman Siegel, executive director of the New York
Civil Liberties Union, said of sweeps during the convention. "And the
unseemliness increases because they are coming in for four days. So if you push
people away because you want to look pretty for the rest of the world that is
the height of manipulation."

Advocates for the homeless say that formal sweeps are unnecessary: More subtle
ways have already accomplished the same result. They cite a program by the 34th
Street Partnership, a group of businesses charged with sprucing up the area. The
advocates say the program, in which the partnership offers $5 to homeless people
who attend monthly meetings of service groups that offer jobs and temporary
housing, is a backhanded way to mop up the homeless specifically during the
convention.

Managing the Homeless

And the recent thinning of the homeless population around Pennsylvania Station
may indicate a victory of sorts for recent efforts to manage the homeless,
efforts that include the clearing of encampments and regulations against the
homeless in public spaces. In interviews with homeless people, many also said
that resistance was useless.

"Ain't nothing you can do about it but get out," said Robert Jones, a
44-year-old homeless man who lives outside Penn Station and intends to sleep on
the subway during the convention.

To bring the homeless issue to the fore at the convention, advocacy groups have
planned protests, soup kitchens, candlelight vigils and, if possible, a camp at
Chelsea Park, at Ninth Avenue and West 28th Street.

The message now, said Mary Brosnahan, the coalition's executive director, is:
"We can't go on for another 12 years with the numbers increasing as they are,
and if the Democrats aren't going to face this issue nobody is."

Fewer to Be Seen

The Democrats, however, will face fewer homeless people than they would have a
few weeks ago.

Workers at the Partnership for the Homeless have estimated that over the last
eight weeks, the number of homeless living around Penn Station -- a hub for the
homeless to panhandle, carry bags and scout out other hustles -- has dropped by
60 percent from the usual 225 to 300. Some of the decrease may be a result of a
seasonal migration from stations to parks and other open spaces.

Bernard Waters, an outreach worker for the 34th Street Partnership, the business
group, said his daily count of the homeless inside the station last week hit a
low of 13, down from more than 50 a few weeks ago.

And while some homeless people said they had not noticed, others interviewed
last week said they have been harassed and kicked out of the station more
frequently since preparations for the convention began.

"That's why I'm out here," said William Snead, 51, a former crack dealer, as he
leaned against a storefront on West 33d Street. "They don't want us around --
period. I guess they are just cleaning house for these big-time people that's
coming."

Everyone in a position to carry out sweeps -- from the Mayor's Office on
Homelessness and Single Room Occupancy Housing Services to Madison Square Garden
to the Amtrak police -- denies that there is an effort to clear the homeless for
the convention.

The police have said that their only effort is a "frozen zone" in the block
adjacent to the Garden, where anyone without convention credentials will be
asked to move.

The organization taking most of the criticism from advocacy groups is the 34th
Street Partnership, which began its incentive program four months ago.

Incentive Program

So far, the 34th Street Partnership has provided services for more than 150
people and has placed about 10 homeless people in temporary rooms, said Jeffrey
S. Grunberg, the group's vice president for social services.

Advocates for the homeless, however, call that program a thinly disguised effort
to move the homeless from the area. Ms. Brosnahan called it "a passive sweep"
and its timing "too suspicious."

Mr. Grunberg said the timing was coincidental -- and the program would not stop
once the convention leaves.

"They just don't know our program," he said. "How do you shoo somebody? They
just come back. My guess is that people who would be critical of us have a
political motive and that we are an easy target."

Steven Riley, a formerly homeless man who runs the United Homeless Organization,
said that clearing the homeless is much easier these days because places like
the parks, Penn Station, Grand Central Terminal, the Port Authority bus terminal
and the subway system already have many rules governing the homeless.

"It's a very sophisticated and subtle sweep," Mr. Riley said. "We are talking
about ordinances and regulations that are directed toward the homeless and
law-enforcement officials use them to get rid of the homeless people."

Dr. Kim Hopper, a co-founder of the Coalition for the Homeless who is now a
research scientist at the Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research in
Orangeburg, N.Y., speculated that many homeless people have heard about the
convention, assumed they would be shuffled away and decided to leave on their
own. "The word on the street is more effective than the sweep itself," he said.

A number of homeless people said they expected to be sent away, and with the
good weather were likely to leave willingly. The Partnership for the Homeless
said some people who usually frequent Penn Station have taken up at Madison
Square Park, at 23d Street and Broadway.

Some homeless people said they did not want to move and wished that their
presence was not seen as blight.

"We're human; we are not animals," said Mr. Snead, the former crack dealer who
lost his right arm and left leg in a shootout four years ago and usually
panhandles inside Penn Station. "I don't see why they want to impress them that
New York is so straight up and such a jolly good time without the homeless.

"But we're here. And we can't do nothing to help ourselves right now."

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The ranks of the homeless seem to be thinning in Manhattan as
the Democratic National Convention draws closer. Despite new regulations and
recent efforts to manage the homeless, a homeless woman panhandled at
Pennsylvania Station.; "They don't want us around -- period. I guess they are
just cleaning house for these big-time people that's coming," said William
Snead, who sat against a storefront on West 33d Street near Madison Square
Garden. (Photographs by Keith Meyers/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Four New French Films Look at Colonial Past

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1347 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 7


This year the French are looking back to their colonial past. They are doing so
in fiction films and documentary films, in theaters and on television, in
museums and magazines and newspapers. Sometimes they do it nostalgically,
sometimes sexily, sometimes with painstaking seriousness. But no matter how they
do it, they seem to obsess on their lost colonial role at a time when their
place in the new Europe is being debated.

The most visible, literally and symbolically, of these colonial examinations are
in four films. Jean-Jacques Annaud turned Marguerite Duras's 1984 novel
"L'Amant" ("The Lover"), a barely veiled reminiscence of her own sexual coming
of age in Indochina in the 1920's, into a steamily sexual, commercially
successful film that will open in the United States this fall.

Then there is Regis Wargnier's ponderous Vietnam epic "Indochine," with
Catherine Deneuve promenading impassively through a sequence of lavish settings.
The director Bertrand Tavernier and the historian Patrick Rotman collaborated on
"La Guerre Sans Nom" ("The War Without a Name"), a four-hour documentary about
the French struggle to retain control of Algeria, consisting largely of
interviews with veterans of that conflict. And Pierre Schoendoerffer made "Dien
Bien Phu," a re-creation of the battle in 1954 that signaled the end of France's
colonial ambitions in Indochina -- and that set the stage for American
involvement in Vietnam.

There is more: for months French television has been showing documentary films,
most of them touching and riveting, of the Indochinese and Algerian conflicts.
The Institute of the Arab World in Paris had a big photo exhibition on Algeria.
Magazines like the weekly Evenement du Jeudi had special issues devoted to
Algeria, where the cease-fire was negotiated 30 years ago. There were even
simultaneous productions of the Algerian-born Albert Camus's play "Caligula" in
Paris. The two, at the grand Comedie Francaise and the rather less grand Theatre
des Mathurins, were wildly different except in their evocations of unhinged
power playing against a more or less explicit north African backdrop.

Different Aspect to Wars

France's doomed effort to retain its imperial dreams dragged on for 16 years: in
Indochina from 1946 to the brutal debacle of the siege of Dien Bien Phu in 1954,
and in Algeria from 1954 to 1962. Unlike the Americans in Vietnam, the French
fought their battles on territory they considered an integral part of their
empire, in the case of Indochina, and of their actual country, in the case of
Algeria.

Whereas the American Vietnam War was fought on television and, in terms of
protest, on the streets at home, the French battles were more clandestine. News
from the front was tightly controlled, and it has been only through
documentaries like Mr. Tavernier's that the French public has learned something
approaching the truth, which included outright torture.

Mr. Schoendoerffer's fictional re-creation of the 57-day siege of the northern
Vietnamese stronghold of Dien Bien Phu is both eerily beautiful and starkly
unsensationalistic. On the French side, some 16,000 soldiers were involved in
the battle; 4,000 lost their lives before the surrender, and 8,000 of the
remaining 12,000 died from their wounds, from the privations of a long march or
in Vietminh confinement. An estimated 10,000 Vietminh, the forerunners of the
Vietcong, also died, but Mr. Schoendoerffer concentrates on the French side of
the conflict.

Of which he was a part. He was a survivor of the siege and the imprisonment,
which lends his account an inescapable ring of truth. A volunteer photographer
who arrived in Vietnam in 1951, he was parachuted into Dien Bien Phu three years
later and was taken prisoner there. In his film, there is a fresh-faced young
photographer rather like himself. The role is played by his son Ludovic.

The director made two previous Vietnamese films: "The 317th Platoon" in 1964,
about the French war, and "The Anderson Platoon," a documentary from 1966 about
Americans fighting there. This new film is an altogether grander effort. Mr.
Schoendoerffer spared no expense, and had the cooperation of the current
Government in Vietnam. "Dien Bien Phu" cost $24 million, used props that are
supposedly accurate in every historical detail and employed 26,000 extras,
including French paratroop divisions and Vietnamese soldiers. The final sequence
-- in which one sees the Vietnamese enemy for the first time -- with its endless
lines of prisoners trudging through the awesome landscape, is astonishing.

Indeed, the entire film is visually astonishing. If one didn't know Mr.
Schoendoerffer's history, one could accuse him of prettifying battle, so
gorgeous are so many sequences. (They are even more sheerly beautiful than
similar passages in Francis Ford Coppola's "Apocalypse Now.") Yet Mr.
Schoendoerffer is not really distorting reality, given the ample attention he
pays to misery and suffering and the true beauty of what he has to show. For
months, "Dien Bien Phu" played in only one Parisian theater, while "Indochine"
and "L'Amant" were all over town. "Indochine" attests once again to France's
love affair with Miss Deneuve, who is called upon to portray all manner of
tormented emotions but who still looks like an impeccably attired tour guide to
the exotic landscapes of southeast Asia.

But the real box-office hit this spring was Mr. Annaud's "Amant," and it's not
hard to see why: sex. Not since "Emmanuelle" in 1974, another sexual odyssey set
in the steamy, dreamy Asian tropics, has a film so captivated the French public.
Both depict young white girls discovering the thrill of sex amid exotic
surroundings.

"L'Amant," which just opened in Britain and which has been largely dismissed
there as prurient trash, arrived with the sort of controversies the French (and
the English, whose tabloids stirred up the fuss) love so well.

First there was Miss Duras, who has made films herself -- protracted minimalist
reveries, for the most part -- and who early on dissociated herself from Mr.
Annaud's effort. She even wrote a sequel to "L'Amant" -- "L'Amant de la Chine du
Nord" ("The Lover From North China") -- which is basically a film scenario of
the first novel and hence her answer to Mr. Annaud. The sequel was published to
coincide with the movie's release, and promptly entered the best-seller lists
along with the original novel.

So financially, at least, everyone profited. But Miss Duras was not mollified.
"My Chinese lover, the real one, was far better looking," she sniffed in a
Reuters interview, which seemed unkind to Mr. Annaud's handsome lead actor, Tony
Leung.

The other scandal involved the amount and quality of the sex in Mr. Annaud's
film. The tabloids on both sides of the English Channel insisted that the sex
was real. Jane March, the 18-year-old English actress who plays the lead (and
who looks about 11) denied that she and Mr. Leung actually made love. Mr. Annaud
was coy.

Some Prefer Nostalgia

Whether all these movies and plays and exhibitions and articles will resolve
anything about the French colonial experience remains to be seen. For every
pained self-searcher like Mr. Tavernier or Mr. Schoendoerffer, there are others
who, even under the guise of seriousness, prefer to wallow in nostalgia.

What is curious is that in either a bathetically romantic film like "Indochine"
or a carnal one like "L'Amant," the French seem to identify with the heroines,
not the heros. France's role in the tropics, they seem to feel, was that of a
questing romantic, a sexual explorer, eagerly open to the exotic and erotic
experiences represented by the masculine realities of alien civilizations.

This clashes sharply against the Marxist model of imperialism, wherein the
helpless third world plays victim to Western rape. But maybe that particular
imperialist paradigm is more a Germanic or Anglo-American construct. The French,
as ever, cling to their own metaphors and play games -- be they romantic or
colonial -- by their own Gallic rules.


LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from Pierre Schoendoerffer's "Dien Bien Phu," one of
several new French films that explore France's colonial past. ("Dien Bien Phu")

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 9, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Stalked by Tales of Misconduct, His Promise Fading, Robb Vows to Endure

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2126 words


Once riding a fast track to power and a spot on a Democratic Presidential
ticket, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia will play only a minor role at next
week's national convention. Given the collapse of his political fortunes, it is
a larger role than many party members had expected him to play.

Over the last 18 months, Mr. Robb has endured a series of allegations --
unproved and adamantly denied -- that he mishandled his personal and political
lives by consorting with drug users, having an affair with a former beauty queen
and waging a vindictive campaign to destroy the career of his chief political
rival, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder.

As a result, the 53-year-old first-term Senator is no longer mentioned as a
Presidential or Vice-Presidential contender. Polls indicate that he is now the
most unpopular major politician in his state, and his critics worry that his
nose dive may take down the Virginia Democratic Party, which he restored to
dominance in the state after it had languished for years.

A Mason-Dixon poll conducted in early June found that Mr. Robb's "favorability"
rating among Virginians had slipped below 20 percent, the lowest of all Senators
in the 16 Southern and border states. A third of Virginia voters thought he
should resign. The same poll, which had a margin of sampling error of plus or
minus 4 percentage points, indicated that Mr. Robb would be defeated in matchups
with any of three potential Republican opponents.

Friends and foes alike view the decline of this Hollywood-handsome former Marine
combat commander, who is married to Lynda Bird Johnson, the daughter of
President Lyndon B. Johnson, as a tragedy of almost classic dimensions. Here is
a man who rose on an image of being an incorruptible, hard-working, stolid, even
stodgy straight shooter, an Eagle Scout given to no excess except perhaps
wholesomeness. But his accusers contend he is just another politician with a
weakness for the flesh and the political dirty trick.

"He's dead," William Anderson, a party activist from Matthews, proclaimed last
month as Mr. Robb ended a speech to the Virginia Democratic Convention in
Roanoke.

The Senator had promised the 2,000 delegates that in time he would refute all
the accusations and emerge vindicated. But Mr. Anderson, like most of the party
faithful in the convention hall, was clearly dubious and worried.

"I hope he doesn't take us down with him," he said as Mr. Robb hurried from the
stage at the end of the speech, his wife clutching his arm, a tight smile locked
on her face.

Worry in His Party As Inquiry Goes On

Although the Senator has not been formally charged with any wrongdoing, one
measure of the seriousness of his troubles is that he has been informed he is
the subject of a Federal grand jury investigation into accusations that he was
involved in electronic eavesdropping on Mr. Wilder.

United States Senators are rarely summoned to appear before grand juries,
especially ones investigating a Senator's own activities rather than the
activities of associates.

On Capitol Hill and in the Democratic Party generally, there is also concern and
worry about Mr. Robb.

As one of the organizers of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council and one
of the successful promoters of Super Tuesday, he was a force in the party's
moderate wing even before his arrival in the Senate. As a freshman Senator, he
continued his rapid rise, demonstrating a willingness to work hard on
legislative matters and the savvy to leave the glory to more senior lawmakers.

The Senate leadership was impressed and made him head of the Democratic
Senatorial Campaign Committee, a fund-raising job that has traditionally been a
springboard for bigger things. But Mr. Robb, preoccupied with answering the
allegations against him, has been an almost invisible money raiser at times,
quietly working the phones and leaving much of the speechmaking and glad-handing
to surrogates like Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell.

Mr. Mitchell and other Senators have not sprung to his defense during his hour
of travail, but conversely they have also avoided any criticism of him. When
Governor Wilder recently sent a letter to Mr. Mitchell complaining that Mr. Robb
had tried to "denigrate" his reputation, Mr. Mitchell said through an aide that
he would take the letter under advisement and that meanwhile he "continued" to
support Senator Robb. There was no elaboration.

Promises to Prevail And Rebuild Image

Mr. Robb, in one of the rare interviews he has given on the subject, not only
denied any personal or public wrongdoing but insisted he would eventually
prevail, rebuild his image and go on to win a second term in 1994. He attributes
most of his troubles to mistakes by overzealous aides, on vendettas by his
political opponents and on sensationalistic coverage by the press.

"I've made my share of mistakes and admitted my human frailties, but I take
comfort that in due course everyone is going to understand," he said, using a
line that has become almost a litany for him in public appearances. "I just have
to endure. You never get back to the point where you were after one of these
things, but I'll get back. My bond has been, and is, my credibility, the core
value, the thing I live by."

Asked to elaborate, he refused. "I'd like to provide details, but I can't," he
said. "Not yet. I'll have to stand on what I've said in the past, my denials,
and wait until the investigations are all over."

Again and again he returned to the endurance theme, his face taut and his teeth
clenched. Several times he slammed a fist into the palm of his other hand as if
to pound home a point. Endurance was also a major theme at the state convention.
At one point he tried to underscore his message by quoting Kipling's poem "If."
He had just reached the stanza that begins "If you can trust yourself when all
men doubt you . . ." when a voice rang out in the hollow darkness of the
convention center: "Repent!"

The Senator concluded his speech with the plea, "Be not discouraged; be not
divided." But when Virginia Democrats talk, they are discouraged; they are
divided.

"We've all been stunned, absolutely stunned," said John Woods, a delegate from
Harrisonburg. "The feeling is that it's over for him."

The latest setback came when Federal prosecutors notified Mr. Robb he was the
subject of a grand jury investigation into his role, if any, in a 1988 incident
in which electronic eavesdropping devices recorded a private cellular phone call
made by Mr. Wilder, who was then Lieutenant Governor. The contents of the tape
were eventually leaked to reporters.

In the call, Mr. Wilder told a friend that Mr. Robb's political career was
sinking because rumors were about that the Senator was partying secretly with an
unsavory crowd. And he boasted that he had planted critical stories about the
Senator in the press.

Although the Senator has denied ordering the eavesdropping, three of his top
aides have pleaded guilty to wiretapping charges, and one has told investigators
that Mr. Robb knew almost from the start about the existence of the tape and its
subsequent use, according to court records.

Long-Running Feud Unravels a Career

Investigators said the eavesdropping was carried out by a ham operator who was
acquainted with some of Mr. Robb's friends in Virginia Beach. The investigators
said the ham gave a copy of the tape to one of those acquaintances, who then
passed it on to some Robb aides, who leaked it.

The aim, apparently, was to focus negative attention on Mr. Wilder and away from
Mr. Robb and his troubles. But the leak served only to underscore what everybody
already knew -- that Mr. Wilder and Mr. Robb were at it again in a feud dating
to the early 1980's, when the two were vying for prominence in Virginia's
Democratic Party.

As for the rumors about the Senator's social life, a book by a private
investigator published last year accused him of having used cocaine while he was
Governor in the early 1980's and of having attended parties in Virginia Beach
where cocaine was used. The investigator, Billy Franklin, had been hired by a
wealthy Republican in Richmond to look into Mr. Robb's personal life.

Then came an accusation of marital infidelity. That charge was made last year by
a Virginia beauty queen, Tai Collins, who claimed in an April 1991 interview
with the NBC News program "Expose" that she had had a sexual liaison with Mr.
Robb in a New York hotel in 1984, while he was Governor. Ms. Collins followed
that revelation with a more detailed account of the alleged affair in an article
published five months later in Playboy magazine, accompanied by nude photographs
of Ms. Collins.

Responding to the charges, the Senator has said repeatedly that he was never
involved with drugs of any kind, and that an investigation by Federal
prosecutors in Virginia Beach found no wrongdoing on his part, though some of
his close acquaintances were subsequently convicted of drug charges. As for the
incident with Ms. Collins, Mr. Robb says he shared a bottle of wine with her and
was given a massage by her, an interlude that he concedes constituted a lack of
judgment on his part. But he adamantly denies any sexual involvement with her or
any problems with his marriage.

"Lynda has given me unbounded love, support and understanding," he said, adding
that she often travels with him.

Similarly, he said, he has received strong support from his mother-in-law, Lady
Bird Johnson, and from his three daughters, Lucinda, Catherine, and Jennifer,
ages 24, 21 and 13.

"If I didn't have that," he said, "this would be impossible to endure."

Trouble Is Serious; Image Has Suffered

Despite his denials, Washington and the Old Dominion are abuzz with speculation
that charges will be filed before the summer is out, and that even if nothing
comes of all the rumors and the investigation, the Senator's tattered career
will be difficult to resuscitate.

"He's been hit with so much bad publicity over the past couple of years that I
find it difficult to see how he could bounce back, no matter what the grand jury
eventually does," said Thomas R. Morris, a University of Richmond political
scientist.

Many of Virginia's top Democrats now shy away from any defense of Mr. Robb or
flatly refuse to discuss his situation. There is considerable speculation that
Governor Wilder may try to snatch the nomination from him if the Senator runs
for a second term in 1994, and that in the fall, should he prevail over the
Governor, he would face a strong challenge from Oliver L. North, the former
Marine colonel who was one of the key figures in the Iran-Contra affair and now
lives in Northern Virginia.

Throughout much of the 1980's, at the peak of his political popularity, Mr.
Robb's favorability rating was in the 70 percent range, more than three times
his current rating. But those were the years when "Chuck" Robb seemed to have it
all.

Born in Phoenix, the son of an airline executive who originally hailed from
Virginia, Mr. Robb took a degree in business administration from the University
of Wisconsin in 1961, then became an officer in the Marine Corps. He served nine
years, including a tour as a military aide at the White House and a tour in
Vietnam as an infantry company commander. It was during his tour at the White
House that he met and courted Lynda Bird Johnson, marrying her there in 1967 in
a storybook ceremony that captured the romantic fancy of the nation.

Mr. Robb left the Marines in 1970 and enrolled in law school at the University
of Virginia, graduating three years later and taking up practice in the state.
Almost inevitably, given his drive to achieve and the family he had married
into, he was drawn to public service. And with the Johnson connection, his
exemplary war record, good looks and moderate positions, he slipped easily into
Virginia politics.

Within a decade, despite having no political experience, he rose straight up
through the state's political ranks, winning election as Lieutenant Governor in
1977, then Governor in 1981 and, finally, capturing a seat in the United States
Senate in 1988.

By the time Mr. Robb reached Capitol Hill, there was considerable speculation
that he would eventually run for President, speculation that he welcomed and in
which his hard-charging staff exulted.

Now there is no exultation, and the speculation is about what the grand jury
will do. Mr. Robb says he has no idea when, or whether, the panel will conclude
its deliberations.

"But that's not the real point," he added. "The point is that whatever happens,
I will endure. The truth will come out. I have some abilities, and one of them
is truth. I take it literally, to a fault you might say."

NAME: Charles S. Robb

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I'll get back," Senator Charles S. Robb said in an interview.
"My bond has been, and is, my credibility, the core value, the thing I live by."
(George Tames for The New York Times)

Chart: "Charles Spittal Robb"

Born: June 26, 1939, Phoenix, Ariz.

Home: McLean, Va.

Family: Married to Lynda Bird Johnson, daughter of President Lyndon B. Johnson;
three daughters.

Education: B.A., University of Wisconsin; J.D., University of Virginia.

Career Highlights: 1961-70, served in the Marine Corps; 1973-74, law clerk,
United States Court of Appeals; 1974-77 and 1986-88, private law practice;
197-1982, Lieutenant Governor of Virginia; 1982-86, Governor of Virginia; 1988,
elected to the U.S. Senate.

Interests: Golf, tennis.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: News Analysis;
Behind Clinton's Choice

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas has set himself a mighty task: nothing less than
the rejuvenation of the Democratic Party.

That was confirmed today by his choice of a running mate. For more than a
decade, Mr. Clinton has been arguing that his party must change or die, because
the country has changed. His selection of Senator Al Gore of Tennessee is
designed to exemplify that change and to help banish the crippling image of the
Democrats as a tired collection of squabbling special-interest groups.

Mr. Gore made the point when he spoke of "a new generation of leadership," a
harking back, conscious or unconscious, to another moment of Democratic
self-renewal, after eight years of Eisenhower ascendancy, when John F. Kennedy
said "the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans."

Challenge in the South

Both candidates are Southerners -- Carthage, Tenn., is less than 400 miles from
Little Rock, Ark. -- and Mr. Clinton's decision clearly demonstrates a
determination to challenge President Bush in the Deep South. The Governor hopes
to threaten one of the main Republican redoubts of recent national elections.

But geography was not the main factor in Mr. Clinton's choice.

"Everyone's saying how unusual it is to pick two Southerners," said Thomas Mann
of the Brookings Institution, a Washington research organization.  "But I think
the profile of these New South politicians makes them attractive in other parts
of the country as well. I see Gore's help in solidifying the moderate cast of
the Democratic ticket and indicating that Clinton is very much in the fight for
the center and swing voters in states like Ohio, Michigan, Illinois."

Both Democratic candidates are young, a whole generation younger than the two
rival Presidential candidates; both come from their party's moderate wing, and
both have emphasized issues like education that appeal to the suburbs, where
nearly half of the
nation's population now lives. The Clinton-Gore ticket is designed not simply
for the old Democratic base of working-class city-dwellers, but also to attract
a new kind of following.

The overpowering historical fact that confronted Mr. Clinton as he made this,
his first major decision of the campaign that will come to a climax in November,
was the failure of the Democratic Presidential ticket in five of the last six
elections. To him and to his allies, it was clear that the burst of liberal
activism represented by the Johnson Administration in the 1960's marked the end
of an era and constituted a formula for electoral stagnation in the future.

In 1976 Jimmy Carter felt that, as a Southern moderate in a party with a
still-vibrant liberal tradition, he needed to reach out to Northern liberals, so
he chose Walter F. Mondale of Minnesota. This year's primaries showed how feeble
that old Democratic tradition has become; only Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa ran a
full-throated liberal campaign, and he did not get very far.

A Shift to the Right

Another sign of the decisive shift of the political spectrum to the right is the
nature of the general-election contest, which will involve Mr. Bush, Ross Perot
and Mr. Clinton, three moderate-to-conservative candidates.

So Mr. Clinton felt no need to make a move to the left. Rather than geographical
or ideological balance, which were so important in holding the disparate
elements of the old Democratic coalition together, he has used the
Vice-Presidential selection to send a message of moderation, while at the same
time trying to shore up some weakenesses in important constituencies.

For those who might be disturbed by charges that Mr. Clinton wiggled out of
service in Vietnam, there is the fact that Mr. Gore served his time there.  For
those who might worry about Mr. Clinton's mixed record on the environment,
especially those in the politically pivotal and environmentally sensitive state
of California, there is Mr. Gore's passionate book on the subject and his
attendance at the recent world environmental conference in Rio de Janeiro.

For those upset by the repeated accusations of marital infidelity leveled at Mr.
Clinton, there is Mr. Gore's unblemished reputation as a family man (although
unlike Mr. Clinton, the Senator and his wife, Tipper, both say they inhaled when
they experimented briefly with marijuana in their youth).

The Democratic ticket also has weaknesses. Most obvious, in a year of voter
disgust with political business as usual, is the conventional background of the
two nominees. Both are career politicians who started young and stayed in
politics.

Neither is by any stretch of the imagination an outsider, although both talk a
lot about rural roots. Mr. Clinton worked for Senator J. William Fulbright while
still in school and studied at Oxford on a Rhodes scholarship. Mr. Gore grew up
not in Tennessee but in Washington; he is a second-generation denizen of Capitol
Hill, having followed his father, Albert Gore Sr., to the House of
Representatives and the Senate.

In addition, both are white male Baptists in an age of pluralism, and both are
domestic-policy specialists, though Mr. Gore has substantial credentials on
national security policy.

But Mr. Clinton's choice was consistent with his past strategies.

As a Democratic governor in a region where Democrats now win only when they can
add younger, suburban whites to the remnants of their old strength among blacks
and rural whites, and also in his work on the moderate Democratic Leadership
Council, Mr. Clinton insisted that the old New Deal and Fair Deal formulas had
run out of gas.

A Symbol of Concern

He made the same arguments in the early primaries this year, emphasizing a
middle-class tax cut as much for its symbolic value as for its economic import.
To those white voters, variously known as Middle Americans, the Silent Majority
and Reagan Democrats, who over the last two decades have fled their urban homes
and their ancestral party, the Arkansas Governor has been trying to say, "The
Democrats care about you and not just the clamorous minorities."

In case anyone missed his point, Mr. Clinton quite decidedly distanced himself a
few weeks ago from the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who is probably the party's leading
spokesman for the cities. Nor have there been public negotiations with other
interest groups over what would or would not be included in the platform.

Not suprisingly, Mr. Jackson reacted negatively to today's news, praising Mr.
Gore for his qualities as a campaigner but arguing that the Democrats could not
fly on one wing, and predicting trouble in states like New York. Mr. Gore did
poorly there in 1988, and Mr. Clinton took a lot of punishment this year before
finally defeating former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California

The Republican reaction suggested concern among Mr. Bush's advisers about the
moderate coloration of the Democratic opposition. Party and campaign officials
promptly issued statements seeking to portray Mr. Gore as a devout liberal and a
big spender, which has never been his reputation here.

Frederic V. Malek, one of the President's senior strategists, also said Mr.
Clinton had wasted the chance to shore up his strength in the Northeast, the
Midwest and the West, and would not be able to compete with Mr. Bush on
"judgment and experience" -- the qualities the President has been emphasizing
recently.

There were no suggestions that Mr. Clinton had hurt himself, as George McGovern
did in 1972 when he picked Senator Thomas F. Eagleton of Missouri at the last
minute, only to discover later that Mr. Eagleton has undergone shock therapy for
mental illness, and as some politicians still believe Mr. Bush did in picking
Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana four years ago. Mr. Gore is known and respected in
political circles, and his past was raked over when he ran for President in
1988.

It is as transmitters of political code that Vice-Presidential selections matter
most -- they help voters decide what kind of person the selector, the man at the
top of the ticket, really is. In only very few cases, such as John F. Kennedy's
choice of Lyndon B. Johnson in 1960, which helped him carry Texas, is there
evidence that running mates exert direct, decisive influence on voting.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Al Gore's staff cheered yesterday in his Capitol Hill
office as they watched him on live televison. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times) (pg. A18)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Man in the News;
A Man Who Was Raised to Be the President: Albert Arnold Gore Jr.

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1548 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


When he announced last summer that he would not run for President this year,
Senator Al Gore of Tennessee said he had too many family responsibilities. But
Mr. Gore left no doubt about his ultimate ambition.

"I would like to be President," he said.

The thought has been in his mind and that of his family since he was a child.
"We raised him for it," Mr. Gore's father, a Representative and Senator for more
than 30 years, said in an interview today.

A Representative at the age of 28, a Senator at 36 and an unsuccessful candidate
for the Democratic Presidential nomination at 39, Mr. Gore, now 44, is tall and
broad-shouldered, somewhat resembling Christopher Reeve, the actor who played
Superman.

Served in Vietnam

Like Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, he has an Ivy League education,
middle-of-the-road positions on most issues and a strong-willed wife.

But unlike Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore has a long public record on foreign and
military matters. He enlisted in the Army and served in Vietnam, despite his
opposition to the war. Now he is a strong advocate of environmental causes, an
area where Mr. Clinton has been criticized.

And potentially most important to the Clinton campaign, Mr. Gore has a
reputation as a straight arrow who will probably not be vulnerable to the
Republican stiletto on personal problems and family values.

Mr. Gore's unsuccessful campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination four
years ago often seemed unfocused, characterized by shifts in emphasis if not in
positions. He did reasonably well in the Southern primaries but dropped out
after a poor showing in New York. Still, the experience and the contacts he made
in that national campaign could prove valuable in this year's race.

Since his 1988 campaign, Mr. Gore, who is 19 months younger than Mr. Clinton,
has concentrated on foreign policy, technology and environmental issues. He was
one of 10 Democratic Senators who broke with their party's leaders and voted to
give President Bush authority to wage war against Iraq. He wrote a book on
ecology that was on The New York Times best-seller list for six weeks this
spring. And he led the Senate delegation to the United Nations Earth Summit in
Rio de Janeiro in June.

Mr. Gore, who was elected to the House of Representatives in 1976 and to the
Senate eight years later, has made a legislative career of mastering complicated
issues like arms control, global warming, biotechnology and computer networks.

"He is extremely intelligent, superbly educated, very industrious and
single-minded," said Jim Sasser, the senior Democratic Senator from Tennessee.
"His style is to learn absolutely everything there is to know about an issue."

But Mr. Gore has often seemed bored with the legislative process -- more
interested in holding hearings and exploring ideas than in making deals and
writing laws. In that regard, he is more like John F. Kennedy, who was an
indifferent lawmaker, than Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the Democratic
Vice-Presidential nominee four years ago, who is a master of the art of
legislating.

As a child, Albert Arnold Gore Jr. led something of a double life. His father,
Albert Gore Sr., was a Representative and Senator for more than 30 years, a New
Deal populist on social issues and at the end of his career, one of the Senate's
fiercest opponents of the war in Vietnam. His mother, Pauline, is a lawyer.

Mr. Gore was born in Washington on March 31, 1948. During the school year, he
lived in his parents' suite at the Fairfax Hotel on Embassy Row and had his head
patted by many of the most prominent politicians in the country. He graduated
from St. Alban's Episcopal School for Boys in Washington, where he was a top
student and played football and basketball.

As a counterweight, he spent the summers on the family farm in Carthage, Tenn.,
about 40 miles east of Nashville. He worked in the fields with the tenant
farmers during the days and hunted with coon dogs at night.

Opposed Vietnam War

Mr. Gore enrolled at Harvard University in 1965 and became active in the antiwar
movement. He worked on Senator Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential campaign in
1968 and graduated with honors in government in 1969.

As a student, he has said, he occasionally smoked marijuana. But he said he had
not used drugs since he became a politician.

Mr. Gore considered going to Canada to avoid Vietnam. But after agonizing with
his family and friends, he enlisted in the Army, despite his opposition to the
war. Friends say the deciding factor was that his father was up for re-election
to the Senate, and Mr. Gore did not want to impose on his father the political
burden of having a draft-dodging son.

Albert Gore Sr. lost the 1970 election, anyway, to the Republican Bill Brock,
and the main campaign issue was Vietnam. Now in their 80's and still active, the
senior Gores live on their farm in Carthage.

In Vietnam for about a year, Mr. Gore was a journalist with an engineering unit;
he never saw combat. But he did sometimes carry a rifle, and in his campaign
literature, he has often used a photograph of himself in full uniform, carrying
his weapon.

Just before he left for Vietnam, he married Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson, whom he
had met at a party the night of his high school graduation. Known as Tipper,
Mrs. Gore, who has a master's degree in psychology, has led campaigns against
what she considers to be the bad influence of pop culture on children. She has
written a book called "Raising PG Kids in an X-Rated Society" (Abingdon Press,
1987).

The Gores, who are Baptists, have four children: Karenna, 18; Kristen, 15; Sara,
13, and Albert 3d, 9, all of whom attend private schools.

Financially, the Gores are comfortable but not so well off as most other
senators. Their assets total less than $1 million, and most of that is tied up
in two homes, one in Arlington, Va., the house Mrs. Gore grew up in, and the
other in Carthage.

After he returned from Vietnam, Mr. Gore went to work as a reporter and later an
editorial writer for The Tennessean in Nashville.

His career as a journalist ended in 1976 when Joe L. Evins, the veteran
Democratic Representative from the district that Mr. Gore's father once
represented, decided to retire. Mr. Gore immediately moved to Carthage and ran
successfully for the office.

After Mr. Gore had been in the House for eight years, Senator Howard H. Baker
Jr., a Republican, decided not to run for re-election. Mr. Gore easily won the
seat. He was re-elected in 1990.

As a campaign speaker, Mr. Gore is erratic -- spirited and evocative one night
and flat and routine the next. He often uses a shouting cadence that works
better with large audiences than with smaller gatherings.

Mr. Gore's position on abortion is somewhat different from Mr. Clinton's and
from the plank in this year's Democratic platform. He opposes Government
financing of abortions for poor women. Since the mid-1980's, Mr. Gore has
favored legal abortions, although before that, he was less firm.

Beyond that, Mr. Gore's stances on issues are similar to the ones Mr. Clinton
has expressed. This year, for example, Mr. Gore has been a chief sponsor of a
measure that would raise the income taxes of the wealthy and use the money to
give a tax break to middle-class families with children. That is also a pet
proposal of Mr. Clinton's.

Position on Gulf War

On military issues, Mr. Gore has usually stood slightly to the right of the
Democratic Party's center. He called his decision to support President Bush on
the war in the Persian Gulf "excruciating," but told the Senate he believed that
the risks of not going to war were ultimately "larger, greater and more costly"
than the risks of going to war.

After the war, he attacked the Bush Administration for criticizing Democrats who
voted against the war resolution, and he urged the President to use American
troops to ground Iraqi helicopters that were killing fleeing Kurds and Shiites.
"We cannot wash our hands of what's going on over there," he said at the time.

On domestic and economic issues, he has generally voted as a liberal Democrat.
He voted against Clarence Thomas's confirmation to the Supreme Court because, he
said, Judge Thomas's constitutional stands "embraced the extreme." Mr. Gore also
said he found Anita F. Hill's testimony about Judge Thomas and sexual harassment
"honest and credible."

His book, "Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit" (Houghton
Mifflin, 1992), assesses forces like overpopulation, deforestation, soil
erosion, air and water pollution, and concludes that now that the cold war is
over, destruction of the environment is the greatest threat to mankind.

Most politicians do not have the patience to read and study. Mr. Gore does, and
one of his main strengths is his ability to master and explain complicated
topics.

His close friend, Representative Thomas J. Downey, Democrat from Long Island,
recalled today a small dinner party a few months ago when Mr. Gore was
explaining an environmental principle on the back of a napkin to Chen Ning Yang,
who holds a Nobel Prize in physics and teaches at the State University of New
York at Stony Brook.

"Imagine," Mr. Downey said, "a United States Senator explaining a scientific
principle to Professor Yang."

NAME: Al Gore

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton and his new running mate, Senator Al Gore,
standing yesterday outside the Governor's mansion in Little Rock, Ark. (Lee
Romero/The New York Times) (pg. A17)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Behind the Scenes;
The Other Albert Gore Watches Proudly From Tennessee

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: CARTHAGE, Tenn., July 9


After a lunch of clam chowder and crackers today Albert Gore Sr. sat at his
kitchen table and watched the television in proud silence as his son and
namesake accepted an invitation to become the Democratic nominee for Vice
President.

But when Senator Al Gore, who does not use the "Jr." after his name, proclaimed
that the Democratic ticket represented a new generation of leadership in
American politics, the white-haired man erupted, "Now that's a powerful
statement." His wife, Pauline, 79 years old, patted him on the back.

Generational change flows through the kitchen of the Gores' farmhouse in the
Cumberland Valley about 40 miles east of Nashville. All around there are
memorabilia from two political careers, the father's and the son's.

A Poster from '76

On one wall is a fan Mr. Gore handed out during his first Congressional
campaign, in 1938. It bears a black-and-white picture of him looking grimly
serious in a stiff collar, his hair carefully slicked in waves. Next to it is a
color poster from his son's first Congressional campaign, in 1976, showing a
smiling, well-coiffed candidate.

All around there are pictures of the elder Mr. Gore, who served seven terms in
the House of Representatives and three in the Senate with the likes of Adlai E.
Stevenson, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. And, as he watched his son and
Gov. Bill Clinton make their speeches from Little Rock today, Mr. Gore, 84 years
old, thought they might resurrect the great coalition that brought Democrats so
many victories in his day.

After the television was turned off he said, "I looked at these two very
talented young men and I thought they might just succeed in reunifying the
Democrats of the South and forming a bridge to the Democrats of the East and
North and West and that it might just last for more than one administration."

The passage of political generations was noted once before on this hilltop farm
overlooking the dark green waters of the Caney Fork River as the great
Democratic coalition born in the New Deal era was finally dissolving.

Opposition to Vietnam War

It was 1969, and the elder Mr. Gore was already in political trouble because of
his opposition to the Vietnam War. His son had just come home after graduating
from Harvard and was facing an almost certain summons from the draft board.

"I was one of those who believed it was not a justifiable cause," Mr. Gore said.

"We discussed it, but I don't know what effect my views had on Al. He told me he
had a decision to make, and he took a long walk alone around the farm. When he
came back, he told us he would fulfill his legal duty, that in fact he would
volunteer."

While his son was in Vietnam, Mr. Gore had to defend his anti-war position in
the toughest campaign of his career, and he was defeated for re-election in
1970.

Mr. Gore then began to divide his time between a Washington law practice,
teaching law at Vanderbilt University and the farm. He later became a
vice-president of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation and only retired as a
corporate officer eight years ago, though he remains a member of the board.

The younger Mr. Gore grew up with politics all around him, and today, after he
left for Little Rock, his father said, "We raised him for it. I taught him to
work hard and to do his duty and his mother made sure he studied his lessons.

But, the father says he never pushed the son to seek elected office. Mr. Gore
recalls that it came as a complete surprise when his son announced he would run
for Congress in 1976.

"I kind of offered to roll up my sleeves," Mr. Gore said, "but Al told me, 'Dad,
I'm very grateful, but I must not be my father's candidate.' "

Mr. Gore was pleased with his son's performance today and after talking to the
Vice-Presidential candidate by telephone, he said, "I told him it was a very
good speech." And then laughing, he added, "I told him nobody would call him
'wooden' today."

It was a reference to the poor reviews of Senator Gore's campaign style during
his unsuccessful run for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1988.

In this campaign Mr. Gore said that his role would be parental not political.
"Unless somebody wants me to give a couple of country boy speeches, Pauline and
I are going to Washington to look after our grandchildren," he said.

NAME: Albert Gore Sr.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Al Gore with his father, Senator Albert Gore, and his mother,
Pauline, as they awaited returns in the 1958 Tennessee Democratic Primary.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Envoy Calls Indictment 'a Shock'

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Colo., July 9


Former United States Ambassador Sam H. Zakhem, a native of Lebanon whose wealthy
father disinherited him for emigrating to America, often said that he gave up a
fortune for the love of his adopted country.

Mr. Zakhem's patriotism, along, no doubt, with his efforts to raise money for
conservative political causes, helped to earn him the appointment as Ambassador
to Bahrain by President Reagan in 1986.

But his resume lacked foreign affairs expertise, and one State Department
observer labeled him an "amateur" dangerously miscast in the hot-spot of Middle
East politics.

In an indictment announced on Tuesday, Mr. Zakhem, 56 years old, and two other
men were charged with secretly accepting $7.7 million from the Government of
Kuwait to act as undisclosed foreign agents in a "propaganda campaign" to
generate support for the war against Iraq.

The Justice Department claims that Mr. Zakhem, along with William R. Kennedy,
the former owner and publisher of The Conservative Digest, and Scott Stanley
Jr., a former editor of the publication, spent $2 million on public relations
and advertising and diverted the rest of the money to their "personal and
undisclosed profit."

Will Plead Not Guilty

Mr. Zakhem, who lives in an elegant stone house in suburban Lakewood, said today
that the indictment "came as a shock -- especially considering the nature and
timing of the charges."

In a telephone interview, Mr. Zakhem, who ran unsuccessfully in May for the
Republican nomination for the United States Senate, said he would plead not
guilty.

"I am a straight-shooting politician who calls a spade a spade," he said.

There have been other reports that Mr. Zakhem sought personal benefits from his
contracts in the Gulf States. The Iraqi News Agency has circulated what it says
is a letter dated May 18, 1990, from the Kuwait ambassador to the United States,
Sheik Saud Nasir al Sabah. The letter, to Kuwait's minister of oil, reportedly
states that "Mr. Zakhem is requesting us to help him, for the present time and
until 1992," to be given a salary "to ensure for him a legal income enabling him
to be totally dedicated to his next electoral campaign."

The Ambassador is said to have written, "As you know, we maintain good relations
with Mr. Zakhem and his good stances towards our Gulf issues."

Mr. Zakhem dismissed the letter as "Iraqi propaganda."

Appointment Criticized

The appointment to Bahrain, brought some criticism at a time when Washington was
increasingly relying on that country in its efforts to limit the tanker wars
between Iran and Iraq.

Richard B. Straus, the editor of the Middle East Policy Survey, wrote in a Los
Angeles Times essay that President Reagan had followed an unwise tradition of
sending weak political appointees to key foreign posts in "funny, cute little
countries."

Mr. Straus added: "These days, however, Bahrain is not a cute little country. It
has become de facto headquarters for the biggest U.S. Naval armada assembled
since World War II."

During his tenure, Mr. Zakhem was often regarded as a competitive diplomat who
considered himself a leading expert on Arab matters. He was recalled once by
Deputy Secretary of State John Whitehead for dealing outside of channels with
the Bahrain Government.

He also argued with Central Intelligence Agency analysts who had contended at
various times that the ruling family in Bahrain was in imminent danger of being
overthrown by the country's pro-Iranian Shiite majority. As it turned out, the
intelligence analysis was wrong; Mr. Zakhem's instincts were right.

Supporters of Mr. Zakhem say the United States benefited from his close
contacts. They contrast his approach with that of April Glaspie, the former
Ambassador to Iraq, who was taken by surprise by Saddam Hussein's invasion of
Kuwait.

Mr. Zakhem first came to the United States after graduating from the American
University in Cairo in 1957. He earned his masters degree in economics at the
University of Detroit. He later returned to Lebanon, but became disenchanted
with some of the country's traditions, such as arranged marriages, according to
his campaign biography.

He moved to Denver in 1965, where he worked as a night watchman and car parker
to put himself through graduate school at the University of Colorado in Boulder,
where he studied political science. As a student, he founded groups in support
of missing soldiers in Vietnam.

After receiving his Ph.D., he became the director of international student
affairs at the University of Denver, and also worked as a researcher for the
Heritage Foundation.

He was elected to the Colorado Legislature in 1974 and won re-election in 1976.
He was elected to the Colorado Senate in 1978 and also held other jobs,
including a stint as a motivational speaker for an orthodontics company.

In Colorado politics, he was known as a maverick who disdained compromise. A
Republican colleague, Ray Powers, described Mr. Zakhem as a "super patriot."

But Arie Taylor, a former Democratic state representative, said Mr. Zakhem took
a tone of righteousness. "What Sam really stood for, I couldn't say," she said.
"He was against everything other than believing that he was a better American
than most of us who were born here."

Theatrical Inclinations

He also had a penchant for publicity stunts. In 1975, he challenged five women
in the Legislature to a game of volleyball. Playing alone, he defeated them
handily.

On one occasion, Mr. Zakhem was ridiculed for jamming a letter opener into the
"no" button on his electronic voting machine while he was off making a speech.

In the indictment, prosecutors charged that the men violated Federal tax laws by
failing to report the money, and ignored the Foreign Agents Registration Act by
failing to disclose their status as Kuwaiti agents when they lobbied Congress
and the Administration.

The indictment charges that Mr. Zakhem and his two associates were contacted by
the Kuwait Government after it had been invaded by Iraq in 1990. It says they
set up two "front" organizations, the Coalition for America at Risk, and later,
the Freedom Task Force.

The group ran television advertisements in support of the war against Iraq and
lobbied members of Congress. Prosecutors said the men used multiple bank
accounts to conceal the source of the funding.

NAME: Sam H. Zakhem

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sam H. Zakhem, a former United States Ambassador to Bahrain,
leaving Federal Court in Denver on Tuesday after being indicted on charges of
secretly acting as a foreign agent of the Kuwait Government. (Dave Buresh/The
Denver Post)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Eric Sevareid, 79, Is Dead; Commentator and Reporter

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1738 words


Eric Sevareid, a radio and television correspondent who became one of the
country's most respected reporters and commentators, died yesterday at his home
in Washington. He was 79 years old.

He died of stomach cancer, said a spokesman for CBS.

Mr. Sevareid, who was recruited as a CBS News correspondent by Edward R. Murrow
when both men were covering the outbreak of war in Europe in 1939, wrote elegant
commentaries that he delivered in grave and sonorous tones, even when he was
being caustically witty. Like Mr. Murrow, Mr. Sevareid was tall with rugged good
looks that served him well during the transition from radio to television.

His writing ability and experience, combined with an ability to project a sense
of fairness and sound judgment, brought him the respect of his peers and
audiences, allowed Mr. Sevareid the right to introduce analysis and even opinion
into his broadcasts. Among his colleagues, he was considered a journalist above
the daily battle for news who had a scholarly mien and a knowledge of the
American past to his choice of words.

Mr. Sevareid took outspoken positions in favor of civil and constitutional
rights on the air and in writing. During the Vietnam War, Mr. Sevareid traveled
to South Vietnam in 1966 and, in a special broadcast, clearly indicated that
prolonging the war was unwise and that a negotiated peace was desirable.

In his long career, he worked in several European and South American countries
and in Washington and New York. He became nationally known for breaking through
the strictures of straight-news reporting by pioneering editorial analysis on
prime-time television.

Mr. Sevareid defined himself as a cultural conservative and a political liberal.
"I find myself politically liberal on domestic affairs and increasingly
conservative on foreign affairs," he wrote in 1964 in the introduction to his
book "This Is Eric Sevareid." He worried a good deal about America's sense of
direction. "The hour may be too late for a high civilization," he said.  "We are
frightened to think that the very rich grow richer, the very poor poorer, the
dark-skinned more violent, our cities simultaneously more crowded and more
desolate, our countryside more ugly."

His was an adventurous life, which included a harrowing month among headhunters
in the Burmese jungles. That was in 1943, after the plane in which he was riding
developed engine trouble as it was flying over the Himalayas from India to
China. Mr. Sevareid and 19 others had to bail out on the India-Burma border but
made it out of the jungle on foot.

Saw Himself as a Writer

Even at the height of his fame as a television correspondent, when his
appearance and stature drew movie offers and invitations to do lucrative
commercials -- which he declined -- Mr. Sevareid told friends that he always
considered himself primarily a writer, not a performer. He wrote dozens of
magazine articles, a syndicated newspaper column and half a dozen books.

"This is the age of the journalist more than the age of the artist, the teacher
or the pastor," he once said. "It is the age of nonfiction because imagination
cannot keep up with the fantastic daily realities."

Mr. Severeid's best-known book, "Not So Wild a Dream," was first published in
1946 after his years of war reporting. The autobiography covered his boyhood in
the Dakotas, journey by canoe through Canada to Hudson Bay, wanderings among
hoboes, apprenticeship as a newspaper reporter in Minneapolis and his adventures
in wartime.  He never forgot witnessing the terror of Nazism and anti-Semitism
in Germany. The book went through 11 printings over the next 28 years and became
a reference book for historians and other students of the Depression and war
years.

'The Concept of Citizen'

"It was a lucky stroke of timing to have been born and to have lived as an
American in this last generation," he wrote in 1976 for a new edition of the
book. "It was good fortune to be a journalist in Washington, now the greatest
single news headquarters in the world since ancient Rome. But we are not Rome;
the world is too big, too varied. The 'American Century' concept of Henry Luce
was an absurdity, too. We were not born to be imperialists; we never learned the
style, and the time for this is gone. We understand the concept of citizen, not
that of subject."

As an essayist who used journalism as the springboard for his idealism, he
wrote: "Travels in all the continents have not lessened my love and respect for
America, but deepened both, in spite of the distressing spread of our
vulgarities. There is a civilization of the heart, too, and the goodness in
Americans, the evangelical strain, has not disappeared. We have often been
innocents abroad and at time have done unintended harm, but no other great power
has the confidence and stability to expose and face its own blunders. We are a
turbulent society but a stable republic."

Arnold Eric Sevareid was born to parents of Norwegian heritage on Nov. 26, 1912,
in Velva, N.D. He spent his first years on the prairie wheatlands, but when
drought struck in the 1920's, the family moved to Minneapolis.

After graduating from Minneapolis Central High School in 1930, he and a friend
embarked on a 2,200-mile canoe trip from Minneapolis to Hudson Bay, to prove
that it was possible to make such a trip through the continent's heartland
entirely by water. He used his experiences as the basis for his first book,
"Canoeing With the Cree" (1935).

At the age of 18, Mr. Sevareid worked as a copy boy and reporter for The
Minneapolis Journal while attending the University of Minnesota. After being
laid off from his reporting job in 1936, he and his first wife, the former Lois
Finger, sailed for Europe. He studied political science at the London School of
Economics, then attended the Alliance Francaise in Paris.

Europe During World War II

In 1938, he was hired by the Paris edition of The New York Herald Tribune and
soon became its night city editor. At the same time, he worked in the Paris
bureau of United Press, the wire service.

In August 1939, only weeks before the outbreak of World War II, Mr. Murrow
called him from London and asked if he wanted to try radio reporting. "I don't
know very much about your experience," Mr. Murrow said, "but I like the way you
write and I like your ideas."

Thus, Mr. Sevareid became one of "Murrow's Boys," who would enable CBS to
dominate radio news for many years. He joined a group of former newspapermen
turned CBS correspondents that was to include William L. Shirer, Charles
Collingwood, Alexander Kendrick, Howard K. Smith, David Schoenbrun, Daniel
Schorr and Richard C. Hottelet.

Last to Broadcast From Paris

Mr. Sevareid covered the French Army and Air Force in Belgium, the Netherlands
and Luxembourg, and he was the last American to broadcast from Paris. He fled
the city with his wife and their infant sons just before the Nazis marched in.
At Bordeaux, he broadcast the news that France was about to surrender. Then Mr.
Sevareid joined Mr. Murrow in London for broadcasts during the Battle of Britain
bombing raids.

Assigned to the CBS Washington bureau after his return to the United States in
late 1940, Mr. Sevareid covered President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the war
effort. Feeling restive at home while the war was still on, however, he headed
for the China-Burma-India theater in 1943.

Back in Europe in 1944, Mr. Sevareid covered the campaign in Italy and Marshal
Tito's partisans in Yugoslavia, landed with the first wave of Americans in
southern France and accompanied them across the Rhine into Germany.

His postwar assignments included Washington, France, Germany and Britain. In
1964, he became a roving correspondent based in Washington; his commentaries
were regularly featured on the "CBS Evening News With Walter Cronkite" until
1977, when Mr. Sevareid reached the company's mandatory retirement age of 65.
His last appearance on a CBS News program was in "Remember Pearl Harbor," which
was broadcast on Dec. 7, 1991.

'Passion and Beauty'

Walter Cronkite recently commented that he regarded Mr. Sevareid as "a master of
the extemporaneous essay," citing Mr. Sevareid's performance when he first
covered a space flight. "I remember that he was skeptical of manned space
flights until he witnessed his first moon launching," Mr. Cronkite said. "Then
he turned to the camera as the rocket disappeared into the stratosphere and
delivered a totally spontaneous tribute to the astronauts and the technical
successes on which they rode, a tribute that was a lovely ode of passion and
beauty."

Charles Kuralt, the anchor of "Sunday Morning" on CBS, said: "Eric was the best
thinker and writer who ever sat down to a microphone. He was the one giant tree
in the forest. He stood alone."

Mr. Sevareid's books included "In One Ear" (1952) and "Small Sounds in the
Night" (1956), which are collections of his magazine and newspaper articles and
CBS broadcasts. He once wrote of himself: "I am cursed with a somewhat
forbidding Scandinavian manner, with a restraint that spells stuffiness to a lot
of people. But . . . inside I am mush, full of a lot of almost bathetic
sentimentality about this country, the Midwest, Abraham Lincoln and the English
language."

Article Cited for Its 'Terrific Impact'

He had a long conversation with Adlai E. Stevenson, the United Nations
Ambassador, two days before Mr. Stevenson's death in July 1965. An article based
on that conversation, which was published in the Nov. 30, 1965, issue of Look
magazine, won the New York Newspaper Guild's Page One Award, citing Mr.
Sevareid's "excellent writing" and the piece's "terrific impact on the United
States and the world."

In retirement, at his home in Washington or at his weekend cabin in the Blue
Ridge Mountains of Virginia, Mr. Sevareid wrote, read and fished.

He is survived by his wife, Suzanne St. Pierre, a former producer for the CBS
News broadcast "60 Minutes"; three children from two previous marriages, which
ended in divorce, and six grandchildren. His two sons, Peter, of Swarthmore,
Pa., and Michael, of Mount Joy, Pa., were born during his first marriage to the
former Miss Finger, and his daughter, Cristina Kennedy, of Frederick, Md., was
born during his second marriage, to Belen Marshall. Services will be private and
a memorial is being planned in September in Washington.

NAME: Eric Sevareid

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eric Sevareid, right, in a photo taken shortly before the CBS
correspondent had to bail out of a crippled airplane into a Burmese jungle
during World War II. With him was Maj. Don Thurmond of the Army. (CBS, 1943)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A POLITICAL PARTY;
Some Apt Comedy in Cabarets

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 26; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


The Democratic National Convention is sparking a surge of political comedy in
New York clubs.

At the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea), Jim Morris, who made his name
in the mid-1980's impersonating Ronald Reagan, is portraying a rogues' gallery
of familiar political types. Well informed and superb at ad-libbing, Mr. Morris
is arguably the smartest and subtlest of the Presidential impersonators whose
lineage goes back to Vaughn Meader (John F. Kennedy) and David Frye (Richard M.
Nixon).

After George Bush was elected President in 1988, Mr. Morris invented a Bush
impersonation that was almost as sharp as his Reagan parody. In his new show at
the Ballroom, he is doing Mr. Bush, Gov. Bill Clinton and Ross Perot as well as
newscasters like Sam Donaldson, Ted Koppel and Tom Brokaw. Part of the show is a
news conference at which the audience fires questions at Mr. Morris as George
Bush. His Ronald Reagan also puts in a nostalgic appearance. Shows are tonight
and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M. Tickets are $30 and $20.
Information: 244-3005.

Another political comic, Blake Clark, is appearing at Caroline's Comedy Club
(1626 Broadway, at 49th Street, midtown Manhattan) this weekend. Mr. Clark is
best known for talking about his experiences in Vietnam, but his humor also
deals with racial tension, family life and yuppies. His best political jokes
carry a wallop.

"The Bush Administration had a plan to flood Iraq with worthless currency to
destabilize their economy," he says. "Well, I don't know if it worked in Iraq,
but it certainly worked in this country."

Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8 and 10:30 P.M. and on Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15 tonight and tomorrow and $12.50 on Sunday, with a two-drink
minimum at all performances. Information: (212) 757-4100.

For musical razzle-dazzle with a patriotic tinge, there is "Say It With Music:
The Irving Berlin Revue" at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor,
Manhattan).

The show, the first revue of Berlin songs permitted in New York by the
composer's family and the fourth program in the club's series of tributes to
veteran Broadway songwriters, stars Kaye Ballard, Liz Calloway, Jason Graae and
Ron Raines. It is Miss Ballard's first New York appearance in four years.

Shows are at 9 and 11:15 P.M. tonight and tomorrow, with an a la carte dinner
menu from 7 P.M. and supper served from 10:30 P.M. There is a $35 cover charge.
Reservations: (212) 632-5000.

For jazz traditionalists, Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street, Manhattan) is
offering a traditional New Orleans jazz and food festival with a seven-member
band headed by the pianist and jazz historian Terry Waldo, the veteran trumpeter
Bill Dillard and the clarinetist Orange Kellin. The 80-year-old Mr. Dillard, who
played with Jelly Roll Morton in the late 1920's, is in superb condition and has
great fun demonstrating "hot" trumpet style using the rubber head of a toilet
plunger as a mute.

Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9:15 and 11:15 P.M. There is a $20 cover
charge and a two-drink minimum. Information: (212) 758-2272.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
The Afterlife Of Muscular Automatons

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 573 words


We recycle soda cans, so why not dead handsome hunks? That seems to have been
the thinking behind "Universal Soldier," a film whose other objective is to team
Jean-Claude Van Damme, the Belgian martial-arts dynamo, with the equally
muscle-bound Dolph Lundgren. Mr. Lundgren, who glowers his way all too
convincingly through the role of a rabid bully, may well be the only man in the
universe who can make Mr. Van Damme look like an actor.

Mr. Van Damme's job here is to feign blankness and speak in a monotone (not
exactly a stretch). Beginning in Vietnam in 1969, "Universal Soldier" traces the
hostile relationship between Luc (Mr. Van Damme) and Scott (Mr. Lundgren), which
does not change much even after they kill each other off and are turned into
automatons.

Packed in ice and shipped to the Nevada desert, both become part of a top-secret
program devoted to "the regeneration of dead soldiers," which is run by the
hardboiled Colonel Perry (Ed O'Ross). The colonel's hard-line attitude is
reflected by his all-beefcake resuscitated fighting forces. When someone is
killed by this commando unit and a character named Woodward insists that "we
have a moral obligation to tell the truth about this," the colonel gapes in
disbelief at such namby-pamby thinking.

Once Luc and Scott resume their combat, the film is fueled mainly by their noisy
confrontations. In one typical moment, Scott attempts to garrote Luc while Luc
is driving a car. This leads to screeching brakes, swerving vehicles and the
sight of Scott flying headlong through the windshield. The dialogue that
accompanies such scenes consists of either boringly predictable obscenities or
sour insults. "Gee, I'm awful sorry about this," sneers Scott, in one of his
more sparkling attempts at humor, "but you're all sentenced to death."

Perhaps in homage to "Rambo," a film that actually looks good in comparison with
this one, Mr. Van Damme flaunts his well-oiled musculature as conspicuously as
possible and endures a string of grueling physical ordeals. In one scene, to
break what is supposed to be a light comic interchange with the perky television
reporter named Veronica (Ally Walker) who spends most of the movie chattering at
him, Mr. Van Damme sticks a knife into his leg to extract some unwanted
material. Fans of the grotesque will be even more interested in Scott's hobby,
which is collecting human ears. Roland Emmerich, the director, approaches such
touches with predictable enthusiasm.

The film's overall caliber is perhaps best captured by Veronica, who tries to
read some top-secret documents and then declares: "You know, I feel like I'm
back in high school or something. I can't make head or tails out of any of this
stuff."

Universal Soldier

Directed by Roland Emmerich; written by Richard Rothstein, Christopher Leitch
and Dean Devlin; director of photography, Karl Walter Lindenlaub; edited by
Michael J. Duthie; music by Christopher Franke; produced by Allen Shapiro, Craig
Baumgarten and Joel B. Michaels. Released by Tri-Star. Running time: 98 minutes.
This film is rated R.
Luc . . . Jean-Claude Van Damme
Scott . . . Dolph Lundgren
Veronica . . . Ally Walker
Colonel Perry . . . Ed O'Ross
Dr. Gregor . . . Jerry Orbach
Woodward . . . Leon Rippy
Garth . . . Tico Wells

"Universal Soldier" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian ). It includes considerable violence and profanity.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Torch Passes in Little Rock

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


When Gov. Bill Clinton introduced Senator Al Gore as his running mate yesterday,
Mr. Gore stressed that it was time for a new generation of leaders to replace
those he said had run out of energy and ideas. The Democratic candidates, both
in their mid-40's, do indeed present a youthful contrast to George Bush and Ross
Perot, both in their 60's. But more important than any age difference are the
historical forces that have shaped this younger generation of political leaders,
the first to be born and grow to maturity after World War II.

Certainly, people become who they are through unique, individual experiences.
But it's also clear that Governor Clinton and Senator Gore are a cohort apart
from previous political generations, just as those in the Kennedy Administration
stood apart from the men who dominated politics before them. They came of age
through the same nation-shaping events.

Vietnam is the most obvious. Americans who matured before that war believed that
the nation was invulnerable in the field and steadfast as a force for good.
Vietnam shook both these beliefs. That Mr. Gore served and Mr. Clinton did not
recalls the painful division that the country experienced around Vietnam. The
Clinton-Gore candidacy reminds us that there were brave, principled people on
both sides of the Vietnam debate, and that those divisions may yet be healed.

The civil rights movement is another crucial experience shared by the two men.
Mr. Clinton, from Arkansas, and Mr. Gore, from Tennessee, both came of age in
states deeply affected by the national struggle against racism and segregation.
In 1957 Federal troops arrived in Little Rock, Ark., to provide black children
safe passage to school. In 1968 Memphis, Tenn., was the site of Martin Luther
King's assassination. The two know firsthand how racism poisons our society.

The women's movement was unfolding as well -- bringing new attitudes and values
that have affected both men's lives. Hillary Clinton and Tipper Gore have both
raised families and asserted themselves outside the home. Their husbands believe
that decisions on abortion and reproductive rights belong in the hands of women.

The two Democrats have something else in common: Both chose political careers
early and have become expert practitioners. Governor Clinton is held in high
esteem by his fellow governors. Senator Gore has earned respect for his incisive
work on foreign policy, arms control and the environment. What a contrast to Mr.
Perot, the business whiz who boasts of his political inexperience.

Senator Gore also brings candor to the Democratic ticket. Whereas Mr. Clinton
exposed himself to derision by saying he had experimented with marijuana but
never inhaled, Senator Gore defused the issue deftly in the 1988 campaign by
acknowledging youthful marijuana use and getting on to more important business.

Whatever factors went into it, the choice of Mr. Gore marks the passing of the
torch in the Democratic Party.


LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Summary of Action in New York State Legislature's 215th Session

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3069 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 10


The 211 members of the State Legislature began their summer recess at 7:46 A.M.
on July 3 in an atmosphere of considerable tension, after all-night negotiations
on an $800 million bond act for jobs and a fiscal bailout plan for Suffolk and
Nassau counties collapsed.

But the session was nonetheless notable for a budget produced almost on time:
after several years of weeks-long delays, lawmakers missed the April 1 deadline
this year by a single day. And the final few days of the session last week rush
of important legislation, including a measure to revamp health insurance by
banning discrimination in setting rates.

Before leaving town, the Democratic-led Assembly approved 1,748 bills and the
Republican-controlled Senate 1,661. Of these, 910 passed both houses.

Gov. Mario M. Cuomo has already signed 301 of these bills into law and vetoed 9
of them; over the next few weeks hundreds more will be sent to his office for
approval or veto.

Following are the major actions of the session.

The Budget

As in the last several years, the budget and New York's fiscal problems in the
face of the recession dominated the first few months of the session. But spurred
in part by public disgust and rebukes from Governor Cuomo over their delays in
the past, lawmakers joined forces to produce the virtually on-time budget.

The spending plan for the fiscal year that began April 1, including all Federal
funds, totaled $55.9 billion, up 7 percent from the previous year. The so-called
general fund budget, which includes most state tax collections and spending,
totaled $30.8 billion, up 3.2 percent.

When they started the budget process, lawmakers faced a potential deficit of
$4.8 billion, meaning that in the absence of any decisions on their part,
projected spending would outpace projected revenues by that amount. Among
actions taken to close the gap was postponement of $1 billion in scheduled
income-tax cuts, tuition increases of up to $500 at public universities, $1
billion in cuts and new charges on health-care providers for Medicaid and
welfare and elimination of thousands of state jobs.

Among a variety of tax-and-fee measures were an increase in the cost of
four-year driver's licenses to $20, from $16, a $25 charge for license
reinstatement, a charge of $1 for every beeper or paging device and new filing
fees for serving a summons.

Redistricting

After the budget was signed, much of the rest of the session was dominated by an
issue that goes to the core of politicians' livelihood: redistricting.

The once-a-decade process, required because of population shifts charted in the
census, was particularly difficult for the state's Congressional delegation,
which must shrink from 34 members to 31. After months of negotiations, the
Assembly and the Senate were unable to agree on a plan, and two lawsuits finally
led to two separate courts devising two different plans.

In the end, the Legislature adopted a state court plan considered likely to
protect most incumbents, although it will probably force Representatives Gary
Ackerman and James H. Scheuer, both Queens Democrats, to run against each other.
The plan would also create one new district in New York City with a majority of
Hispanic voters. Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat, said he
would run in the new district, rather than in the districts now represented by
Ted Weiss, a Manhattan Democrat, or Bill Green, a Manhattan Republican.

Redistricting for the State Legislature proved somewhat less contentious, in
part because the number of districts remained unchanged and in part because the
Senate Republicans were essentially allowed to draw their new district lines,
while the Assembly Democrats controlled the process in their house. The chief
features of the plan, which survived a variety of court challenges, are the
creation in each chamber of a few new seats in New York City where ethnic
minorities make up a majority of voters and the preservation of districts for
nearly every incumbent in the majority parties.


Energy and Environment

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would repeal the minimum price that utilities must pay for
power purchased from non-utility electricity generators.

Would increase liability limits for oil spills while providing limited immunity
for companies hired to clean them up.

Would allow bear hunters to use dogs in pursuing their prey.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have established a dedicated trust fund for land
protection, recycling, water treatment and other environmental purposes.

Would have strengthened protections for the Adirondack Park wilderness through
conservation incentives and new zoning laws.

Would have decreased energy bills downstate and increased them upstate by taxing
electricity and natural gas on the basis of the amount used rather than the
price.

Would have required the New York Power Authority to make an environmental-impact
statement for large power purchases from outside the state.

Would have authorized private citizens to sue to correct environmental
violations.

Would have exempted New York City from some provisions of the law requiring that
municipal recycling programs be in place by September 1992.


Education

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Authorizes a waiver of bidding in New York City contracts
for transporting disabled preschoolers.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would establish a "test takers' bill of rights" setting
forth due process for students whose standardized-test results are questioned by
the companies that administer them.

Would authorize school districts to share certain administrative personnel to
increase efficiency.

Would require school districts to provide facilitators upon request to parents
who are hearing-impaired for school meetings.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have altered the state education-aid formula in order
to direct more money to New York City.

Would have required the state government to refund to local school districts all
education-aid funds cut in the last two years.

Would have mandated recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance at State University
of New York graduations.

Would have increased the state's maximum tuition-assistance grant for all
incoming freshmen from $3,650 to $4,050; the maximum will apply to students at
the level of sophomore and above.

Would have required public universities to provide voter-registration
applications to all students who are eligible to vote.

Would have equalized the pupil enrollments among New York City school districts
and allowed for an expansion from the current 32 districts.


Labor And Business

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Would expand local governments' authorization to grant
zoning variances to developers who provide "cultural or social amenities" to the
community.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would make permanent the "poison pill" law enabling
corporations that are targets for hostile takeovers to dilute their stock,
permitting shareholders to purchase shares at a reduced cost.

Would amend the Taylor Law to give the state's Public Employee Federation the
right to use binding arbitration to break contract impasses.

Would prohibit employers from discriminating against people who engage in legal
activities, including cigarette smoking, during non-working hours.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have put an $800 million bond act, intended to create
public-works projects and jobs, before the voters in November.

Would have increased the bonding authority for the state's Jobs Development
Authority by $100 million, to $700 million.

Would have expanded requirements that New York businesses be used in the state's
procurement of goods and services.

Would have authorized the state to tax fuel and cigarettes sold on Indian
reservations.

Would have created a new business structure in New York State, known as a
limited liability company, that would have had the tax status of a limited
partnership but the limited liability of a corporation.

Would have required that all new cars and trucks sold in the state display a
sticker identifying the country in which they were assembled and the percentage
of principal parts manufactured in the United States.


Housing

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Extends the "loft law" in New York City for four years,
protecting tenants in commercial and manufacturing buildings from displacement,
and provides rent-increase incentives for landlords to bring the buildings into
compliance with residential codes.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would expand lead-paint abatement efforts by enabling the
New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development to provide
loans or grants to private housing owners.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have allowed counties to institute requirements
stricter than the state's on mobile homes.


Agriculture

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Streamlines the state review process for new agricultural
pesticides found safe by the Federal Government.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would strengthen so-called right-to-farm legislation by
increasing property-tax relief for farmers and providing protection from
so-called nuisance suits relating to some farming practices.

Would amend state building codes to exempt temporary greenhouses from
building-permit requirements.


Health And Insurance

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Extends the latest date Vietnam veterans can file lawsuits
related to Agent Orange exposure to June 16, 1994.

Requires detailed fiscal reporting to the Legislature and Comptroller by
research institutions operated by state agencies, including Health Research Inc.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would radically revise the state's insurance system by
forcing commercial insurance companies to accept all applicants and by
forbidding them to set rates based on factors like age, sex and medical
condition.

Would establish a new board to certify and license midwives while giving them
authority to prescribe certain drugs and order laboratory tests.

Would require insurance companies to cover the cost of Pap smears.

Would raise Medicaid reimbursement rates for pharmacists by increasing the
dispensing fee from $2.60 to $4.10 and would reduce the prescription drug
co-payment for Medicaid recipients from $2 to $1.

Would require doctors and other health-care providers to test children and
pregnant women for lead poisoning when first examining them.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have established a universal health-care system
financed by new payroll taxes.

Would have required parental notification, or an exemption from a judge, before
a teen-ager could receive an abortion.

Would have taken money from the state's Bad Debt and Charity Care pool to
finance an expansion of the Child Health Plus program, which provides insurance
at low or no cost to the children of the working poor.

Would have banned cigarette-vending machines from many locations and forced
public displays of tobacco advertisements to be accompanied by anti-smoking ads.

Would have restricted physicians' ownership of pharmacies within 50 miles of
their practices.

Would have limited the ability of doctors to refer patients to laboratories in
which they have a financial interest.


Criminal Justice

LEGISLATION VETOED.  Would have reinstated the death penalty.

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Allows terminally ill inmates who are no longer a threat to
society to be paroled so they can die at home.

Allows news organizations to videotape and photograph judicial proceedings.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would allow crime victims to sue criminals for economic and
emotional harm and to sue to receive profits from crimes.

Would allow victims or their families the right to make a statement at
sentencing.

Would set new training and licensing standards for security guards.

Would make the act of stalking, the repeated harassment of another person, a
felony punishable by up to three years in prison.

Would make it illegal to sell unauthorized firearms to a minor.

Would prohibit the sale of children's pencils designed to look like hypodermic
needles.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have increased the penalties for crimes motivated by
bias.

Would have increased the penalties for rapists and sex offenders.

Would have forced the New York City Police Department to equip all its officers
with 9-millimeter semiautomatic weapons.

Would have given the Legislature greater oversight of the expansion of the New
York City Police Department.

Would have established a statewide DNA database for use in identifying
criminals.

Would have increased the maximum penalties, to one year in jail, for people
knowingly blocking the entrance of a health facility or abortion clinic.

Welfare And the Family

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Saves money in the Medicaid program by requiring
co-payments for medical services, limiting reimbursement for personal care,
reducing benefits for Home Relief recipients and other measures.

Enables a parent who is likely to die or become incapacitated within two years
to petition a court for the appointment of a standby guardian for his or her
children.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would remove the courts from the process of developing
treatment plans for disabled infants, leaving those decisions to committees of
parents, health-care providers and county social workers.

Would ban commercial surrogate parenting.

Would restrict the power of court-appointed guardians so that they can act only
in those areas in which impaired persons are unable to care for themselves.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have provided for the state to assume the share of
Medicaid costs currently paid by local governments while taking taxing authority
from the localities.


Transportation

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would change the composition of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority board to include a riders' representative and a labor
representative.

Would increase the fines for drunk driving.

Would increase the fines for boating while intoxicated, and use the money for
boating-safety programs.

Would make it a crime to operate a snowmobile on public land while drunk.

Would permit non-New York City taxi and limousine drivers to operate in New York
City on limited basis for a fee.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have given the New York State Thruway Authority
responsibility for the Erie Canal and the power to carry out economic
development projects along the Thruway corridor.

Would have instituted a number of reforms in the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority, including requiring public hearings on the agency's annual budget.

Would have increased the penalties for knowingly disconnecting brakes on trucks.



Government

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Consolidates the agencies responsible for drug-abuse and
alcohol-abuse services into one agency, the Office of Alcoholism and Substance
Abuse Services.

Reforms the election laws to increase ballot access and make it easier to
register to vote.

Sets new limits on campaign contributions.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would institute a number of changes in the state budget
process, including adding an amendment to the constitution -- subject to voter
approval -- that would allow the state to impose a contingency budget in years
when there is no budget agreement by April 1.

Would grant new rights to taxpayers, including new procedures for dealing with
the Tax Department, and require that interest be paid on refunds submitted
before April 15 and not paid within 45 days.

Would cap increases in New York City property-tax assessments at 2 percent,
avoiding a larger increase recommended for apartment owners.

LEGISLATION KILLED.Would have eliminated the requirement that registering to
vote take place at least 10 days before Election Day.

Would have allowed Nassau and Suffolk counties to levy new taxes and issue new
deficit-borrowing notes to close budget gaps.

Would have proposed a constitutional amendment, subject to voter approval, to
set a cap on state spending.

Would have allowed residents of Queens to vote on seceding from New York City.

Consumer Affairs

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Would eliminate the 10-day grace period before banks can
charge interest on late credit-card payments and would make it easier for banks
to issue cards with variable interest rates.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would prohibit developers and others from suing citizens
who protest proposed projects at public hearings.

Would raise to $500 the maximum amount that could be charged under a dating
service contract.

Would require pet-cemetery owners to be licensed by the state.

Would require that all car alarms sold or installed in the state shut off
automatically after three minutes and would allow the police to ticket a car in
violation of the law.

Would require that customers making long-distance telephone calls from pay
phones be billed from the locations in which the calls originate.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have granted consumers the right to cancel within
three days any unsolicited sale made over the telephone.

Would have guaranteed the privacy of people renting or buying videotapes.

Would have shortened the time that businesses have to wait before beginning a
legal proceeding against the issuer of a bad check.

Would have reinstated the law requiring supermarkets to place a pricetag on each
item.


Miscellaneous

LEGISLATION SIGNED.  Imposes fines of up to $1,000 on people who falsely
represent themselves as handicapped in order to get better parking spaces.

Prohibits the practice of catching a shark, removing its fin and then throwing
the carcass back into the sea.

LEGISLATION PASSED.  Would establish a statewide licensing system for manicurist
salons.

Would revise state laws on estates and trusts to enhance inheritance rights of
spouses and children.

Would allow special vanity plates with the Girl Scout emblem.

LEGISLATION KILLED.  Would have prohibited discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation in matters of employment, education, housing, public accommodations
and credit.

Would have banned discrimination on the basis of sex, race or religion at clubs
with more than 100 members that accept money from nonmembers for business
purposes.

Would have made it a crime to sell trading cards that portray criminals and
glorify crime to children.

Would have allowed people registering American-made cars and trucks to request
license plates showing the American flag instead of the Statue of Liberty.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As the State Senate worked on April 2 to pass a budget, Senator
Ralph J. Marino, seated center, talked with Senator Manfred Ohrenstein,
standing. Also in the front row were Senators Roy M. Goodman, left, and Ronald
B. Stafford. At rear were, from left, Senators Owen H. Johnson, Dean G. Skelos,
Nicholas A. Spano, Joseph L. Bruno and Mary B. Goodhue. (David Jennings for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Ones We Left Behind

BYLINE: By Samuel G. Freedman;  Samuel G. Freedman is the author of "Small
Victories: The Real World of a Teacher, Her Students, and Their High School" and
the forthcoming "Upon This Rock: The Miracles of a Black Church."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 676 words



A YEAR IN SAIGON
How I Gave Up My Glitzy Job in Television to Have the Time of My Life Teaching
Amerasian Kids in Vietnam.
By Katie Kelly.
Illustrated. 254 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $22.

AS its subtitle makes more than clear, Katie Kelly's book is meant to gain
narrative pungency and moral power from the contrast of two cities -- the
superficial New York of the 1980's, where she was a well-known television, movie
and theater critic, and the desperate Saigon of 1990, where she tutored
Amerasian children. But the place that truly suffuses "A Year in Saigon" is the
Nebraska hamlet of Albion, where Ms. Kelly was born in the midst of the Great
Depression. Yet the qualities that she suggests were instilled in her by the
small-town Midwest may account for her book's unpredictable oscillations between
the maddeningly amateurish and the genuinely moving.

As author and character, Ms. Kelly strikes a reader as generous in spirit,
breathless in tone and almost insufferably plucky. There is the writer who grabs
for the nearest cliche -- giving us "flat-footed," "fired-up," "no place to run,
no place to hide" and "heaving a sigh of relief" all within the space of two
pages -- and gushes at one juncture, "What a lucky woman you are, Katie Kelly."
Yet there is also the writer who listens to her students and their families with
empathy and possesses an acute eye for detail, the sort of detail a more jaded
journalist might overlook.

She depicts Saigon subverting every attempt to be remade into Ho Chi Minh City.
Discos throb to Bon Jovi songs, with videos pirated from MTV. An over-40
basketball league is organized in the neighborhood of Cholon. From mousse and
styling gel to Maalox and Tylenol, Western goods proliferate. It seems both
plausible and hilarious, then, when Ms. Kelly misunderstands a tourist guide who
urges her to see "the Temple of Little Richard" -- which turns out to be the
Temple of Literature.

The most palpable signs of America are, of course, the Amerasian children Ms.
Kelly befriends. She teaches them English, pays for them to see dentists and
doctors, treats them to meals and field trips, and, finally, assists them in
clearing the bureaucratic obstacles to emigration. As Ms. Kelly ironically
points out, the gradual acceptance of Amerasians and their families by the
United States has transformed these "hated and despised half-breeds" from the
"dust of life" into the "children of gold." One mother tells Ms. Kelly of
receiving an offer of $2,000 to sell her Amerasian daughter into marriage.

The reader roots shamelessly for Ms. Kelly's students, many of them connected to
their American fathers only by faded snapshots. Who cannot be touched, reading
about the introverted young man named Bryner who appears one day asking for help
in pronouncing the words "depression, despair, desperation, hopeless, sad"? To
her credit, Ms. Kelly shows us another Amerasian who, believing that orphans
will receive preference in the emigration process, denies the existence of his
own mother.

If only Ms. Kelly's prose itself were similarly subtle. Clearly, she must occupy
the center of the narrative, serving as a reader's surrogate. But that primacy
need not include references to having "a very serious Big Mac attack" or ogling
the pop singer George Michael's "buns" -- the sort of minutiae that seems more
appropriate for a personal journal than a book. When Ms. Kelly doesn't try so
hard, as in her wonderfully precise and succinct recollections of Nebraska, she
succeeds in conveying much more.

Only in the final paragraph, for instance, does she write with winning
simplicity about her motives in returning to Saigon after a tourist trip in
1988: "Unlike the veterans who suffered first the horrors of war in Vietnam and
then returned to scorn and contempt here in America, I had no demons to
exorcise. No ghosts to banish. But I was so shocked and saddened at the sight of
all those Amerasians roaming the streets of Saigon that I wanted to go back and
do some little bit of good."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Katie Kelly with an Amerasian teen-ager in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam (the former Saigon), in 1990. (Mary Beth Camp/Matrix)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
The Right to Intervene for a Humanitarian Cause

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


THE Munich Summit's threat last week to force open relief routes into Sarajevo
and other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina if necessary is the latest example of
a concept that is gaining recognition in international law, the elevation of the
rights of suffering people above sovereignty.

The trend has continued for four years as the world community has broken new
ground in international law, slowly laying the foundations of a new right of
outside humanitarian intervention in the formerly sacrosanct internal affairs of
sovereign states.

Yet acceptance of this idea remains limited, with many third world governments
resisting the idea that foreign governments and aid organizations should have
any automatic right to help victims of catastrophes in other countries, lest it
create a pretext for political interference by their former colonial masters.

Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a special case since it is unclear who, if
anyone, represents the legitimate government of this war-torn and ethnically
divided country. The members of the seven-nation economic summit said they would
seek United Nations Security Council approval for any new armed humanitarian
intervention. The case of the former Yugoslavia also underscores a tradition of
Western powers to show more concern over nearby countries than over those in the
developing world, where unrest is chronic.

Increasingly disgusted over how oppressive regimes have sought to use food and
medicine as weapons of war, various United Nations bodies have since 1987 begun
to establish the right of humanitarian intervention in international law.

Paradoxically, forcible humanitarian intervention was often considered more
legitimate before the United Nations was created than afterward. In 1860, for
example, the European powers authorized France to invade Lebanon to save its
Christians from Syrian persecution. In 1877 they authorized Russia to invade
Bosnia and Herzegovina to protect its Christians against the Turks.

But at first the United Nations Charter seemed to make such intervention legally
difficult by outlawing war unless declared by the Security Council and banning
outside interference in matters "essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
any state."

Supplies as Weapons

Cold war tensions virtually assured paralysis, with the rival superpowers
fearing that humanitarian intervention would be directed against their
interests. And while Vietnam finally drove the Khmer Rouge from power in
Cambodia and Tanzanian troops overthrew Uganda's Idi Amin, they did so after
hundreds of thousands had died.

But with the cold war over, Western governments and humanitarian organizations
began pressing for new action to defend vulnerable people, angered by clear
evidence food and medicine were used as weapons in the civil wars in Ethiopia
and Sudan.

In 1988 the General Assembly, at France's urging, adopted a resolution
recognizing for the first time that private humanitarian organizations have a
role to play in "natural disasters and similar emergency situations." Last year
the Assembly passed a resolution creating a high-level humanitarian aid
coordinator. The resolution also suggested that while the United Nations should
try to win the consent of affected governments before sending aid, it is not
necessarily prohibited from intervening if it fails.

Earlier that same year the Security Council had gone far further in the wake of
Iraq's Gulf War defeat. It enabled the United States, Britain, France and the
Netherlands to establish safe havens and armed protection for fleeing Kurdish
refugees.

Finally, at its first-ever summit-level meeting last January, the Security
Council affirmed its right to intervene in catastrophic situations in the future
by acknowledging for the first time the existence of "nonmilitary" threats to
peace and security "in the economic, social, humanitarian and ecological
fields."

In the meantime, aid organizations have been making their own practical
contributions to establishing a right of humanitarian intervention.

In the mid-1980's the United Nations Children's Fund arranged for "days of
tranquillity" during the civil war in El Salvador: both sides stopped fighting
so health workers could inoculate children safely. Unicef later expanded this
idea, creating such corridors in Sudan, Ethiopia and other civil-war ravaged
countries to allow humanitarian organizations to transport assistance to
civilians facing food and medical shortages.

At their Addis Ababa summit in April, the leaders of the governments of Sudan,
Ethiopia and other countries of the troubled Horn of Africa asserted "the
fundamental and basic right of the peoples of the region to receive food and
other forms of humanitarian assistance." While they pledged that people have
that right, the translation of words into deeds has yet to be tested.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A member of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Sarajevo,
Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Noel Quidu/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Serbs Assaulting Last Stronghold In Bosnia's East

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, July 11


Four days after the leaders of seven major industrial democracies demanded an
end to Serbian military offensives in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian
nationalist forces today began a major assault on the last big Muslim-controlled
town in eastern Bosnia.

The attack on Gorazde, southeast of Sarajevo, threw the Bosnian Government into
further desperation.

President Alija Izetbegovic, returning here this afternoon aboard a Western
relief flight from a meeting Thursday with President Bush in Finland, was
greeted by angry demands from Muslim fighters that he release scarce stocks of
ammunition for an attempt to break through to Gorazde.

Soldiers' Attrition

With the capture of Gorazde, where 50,000 people are under siege, Serbian forces
would be free to concentrate attacks here on Sarajevo, the capital. Bosnian
forces here are being weakened daily by diminishing supplies of ammunition in
their attempt to withstand shelling and the Serbian siege.

Sarajevo has been under renewed heavy bombardment by the Serbs for the last
three days. The bombing followed a declaration by the leaders of the seven
economic powers, issued in Munich, Germany, on Tuesday, demanding that Serbian
forces stop attacking Bosnian towns.

A 55,000-man Serbian nationalist army, with heavy weapons from the
Serbian-dominated Yugoslav national army, has been used to create what Belgrade
says will be an independent state on two-thirds of the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a former republic in the old Yugoslav federation.

But there had been hope here that after the meetings in Helsinki, Finland, and
Munich, the Serbian forces would at least pause.

Except for Sarajevo, no Bosnian town has faced as bleak a situation as Gorazde,
where 50,000 people -- most Muslims, 23,000 of them refugees from previous
Serbian attacks elsewhere in eastern Bosnia -- have been surrounded and cut off
from supplies for more than three months.

Amateur radio operators who have been the only link with the outside world say
that Gorazde's people have been eating grass, that 15 children a day are dying
of malnutrition and other diseases, and that surgery has been carried out
without anesthesia.

Maj. Sefer Halilovic, the Government's military commander, said the Serbian
forces moved columns of heavy armor toward Gorazde over a 48-hour period and
attacked at dawn today from three sides.

An amateur radio operator's report quoted in a Sarajevo broadcast called the
situation after a six-hour bombardment "hellish," with much of the town burning
from shells, and heavy casualties taken by the town's defenders.

Top Government officials said they doubted that the defenders could last more
than a day or two before Gorazde, like every other Muslim town in eastern
Bosnia, fell to the Serbs.

U.N. Troops Become Targets

In Sarajevo today, a rocket-propelled grenade fired from the Serbs' hillside
positions narrowly missed a United Nations armored personnel carrier heading
into the city at a point midway between United Nations headquarters and the
Bosnian Presidency building.

When United Nations soldiers emerged from the vehicle, they came under fire from
machine-gun and antiaircraft weapons, and, their headquarters said, two
civilians were killed. The Bosnian Government put the toll at three dead and
three wounded.

Mr. Izetbegovic was expected in the city at about the same time in a similar
United Nations vehicle, which was bringing him from the airport. When he
arrived, he seemed stunned by the worsening situation, including the attack on
Gorazde, and the fears among his offficials of more massacres of Muslims.

The Government has estimated that more than 50,000 people, most of them Muslims,
have been killed in the three-month war, and that 1.5 million people, a third of
the population, have been driven from their homes.

Mr. Izetbegovic had approached the encounter with Mr. Bush as a last-chance
opportunity to appeal for Western military intervention to end the siege of
Sarajevo. Failing to persuade the President to bomb Serbian gun positions there,
he next hoped for a pledge of American weapons.

The President gave neither, and the strong condemnation made of Serbia and its
forces by Mr. Bush, by the leaders of the Group of Seven in Munich, and by the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in Helsinki was seen here as a
poor consolation prize.

Mr. Izetbegovic told the fighters pleading for an attack on Gorazde that
Bosnia's plight was increasingly grim. One of the men, in his late 30's, pushed
past guards into the Bosnian leader's office, and demanded that enough arms and
ammunition be released to make possible an assault on the Serbian lines around
Gorazde.

When Mr. Izetbegovic replied that committing men and weapons to Gorazde would be
hopeless because of the superior Serbian nationalist forces, the soldier
demanded that he make a new appeal for international help.

'A Sinking Ship'

"Look, we are in the position of men in a sinking ship," the President
responded, "2,000 kilometers from shore, putting a note in a bottle. What hope
is there that anybody will find it, or that they will do anything in time?"

Bosnian Government officials here, who represent a coalition of Muslim, ethnic
Croats and some ethnic Serbs, appeared to have been surprised by the bold
Serbian attack on Gorazde.

Mr. Izetbegovic said that he had found Mr. Bush deeply concerned about the
plight of people in Sarajevo and elsewhere, and attentive but noncommittal when
the he made his pleas for military help.

"He didn't say so exactly, but I had the impression from the remarks that he
made that Vietnam was very much on his mind," Mr. Izetbegovic said of his
35-minute meeting with the American President.

According to the account of the Gorazde attack by Bosnian Government military
headquarters in Sarajevo, there was more than timing to suggest that it had been
a direct challenge to the calls made by Mr. Bush and other leaders for an end to
the Serbian military involvement. Major Halilovic, the army commander, said the
Serbian units that had converged on Gorazde included armored reinforcements from
a Yugoslav Army corps based at Uzice, in southwestern Serbia.

Uzice has been a staging post by the Serbian paramilitary groups that have been
responsible for many attacks in the Drina River valley. Major Halilovic said
intelligence reports from the Gorazde area indicated that the paramilitary
forces, including a widely feared group, the White Eagles, had been involved
there.

Accounts from witnesses have told of the paramilitary groups' torturing and
killing thousands of Muslims in the drive to "cleanse" the region for exclusive
Serbian habitation.

Mr. Izetbegovic's Foreign Minister, Haris Siladzic, issued a statement in
Helsinki pleading that the world not allow Serbia and Montenegro, its partner in
the new, truncated Yugoslavia, to take Gorazde.

"Literally, tens of thousands of lives are in direct and imminent jeopardy from
foreign troops and weapons crossing our borders from Serbia and Montenegro," he
said. "We are concerned that this will be the worst massacre by the aggressor
thus far."

What of Milosevic?

One view here was that the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, who has close
connections with the paramilitary groups, had decided to complete the takeover
of eastern Bosnia, where nearly 80 percent of the 500,000 people were Muslims at
the time the war began. According to this view, Mr. Milosevic may have decided
to renew the heavy attacks on Sarajevo for the same reason, to insure that the
city is captured before foreign pressure leads to a halt of military offensives.

At dusk tonight, Gorazde was said to be facing 40 Serbian tanks, 40 mobile
anti-aircraft guns and an array of multiple-rocket launchers, as well as
thousands of fighters. It now seems likely to fall like all the other Muslim
towns in a 125-mile-long stretch of eastern Bosnia bordering Serbia.

Captured county centers like Zvornik, Bratunac, Vlasenica, Srebrenica, Visegrad,
Rogatica, Cajnice and Foca are mostly ghost towns now, with their Muslim
populations either dead, in one of the detention camps where 100,000 Muslims are
said to be held, or among the tide of refugees.

Many of the refugees reach Sarajevo, bringing with them accounts of fresh
atrocities.

Last month, two trucks from the French group Doctors Without Borders tried to
reach Gorazde. They were turned back by Serbian commanders. United Nations
relief officials also tried but gave up, saying it was too dangerous. This left
the town, an old Muslim settlement lying in a deep valley, to face the Serbian
attackers alone.

Last week, Gorazde's Mayor, Hadzo Efendic, radioed his most urgent need.

"Please get us a surgeon," he said. "We are having to operate here with
amateurs."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Serbian forces began a major assault on Gorazde, fighting
continued in Sarajevo. A Bosnian soldier who was killed yesterday by a sniper
was carried away by comrades in the capital. (Associated Press)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina, indicating Gorazde. (pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japan's Other War Crimes

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


Japan deserves credit for accepting responsibility, finally, for the sexual
enslavement of tens of thousands of Korean women during World War II. But the
gesture was neither spontaneous nor graceful. Half a century later, Tokyo still
resists acknowledging other appalling wartime crimes. Until it does, Japan's
efforts to play a more active role in Asian affairs will provoke distrust.

Some 20 million people died in the Pacific war, 17 million of them victims of
Japanese aggression. Yet Japanese textbooks and popular culture still emphasize
how Japan suffered.

Koreans and Chinese paid the highest price. During 35 years of colonial rule,
Japan tried to stamp out Korean language and culture, even forcing Koreans to
take Japanese names. In the war years, hundreds of thousands of Koreans were
conscripted as slave laborers. Many were young women forced to provide sex to
Japanese soldiers.

China lost a staggering 10 million people to Japanese aggression. In six weeks
in Nanjing, between 100,000 and 300,000 were killed, and 20,000 raped. Two
million Vietnamese starved to death under Japanese occupation. Thousands of
prisoners of war died in germ warfare experiments.

The overwhelming majority of today's Japanese grew up after the war and have no
personal complicity. But neither do they have any real understanding of their
country's war crimes; they cannot grasp how other Asians feel.

Japanese officials offer cautious apologies. And Tokyo has paid financial
compensation. But in contrast to Germany, Japan has made little attempt to come
to terms with recent history.

As part of U.N. peacekeeping operations, Japanese soldiers may soon appear on
the Asian mainland, in Cambodia, for the first time since World War II. That
step toward a more internationalist future makes it imperative for Tokyo to face
up fully to an ugly past.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
The Standard Bearers

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


I once wrote a column called "Life in the 30's." The title, a reference to my
age, was a problem. Some readers thought it referred to the Depression and some
thought it referred to the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.  But the worst part
was that it was exclusionary: readers who were over 40 felt disinvited from the
audience, which is the last thing any writer wants.

It is the last thing any candidate wants, but disinvitation was what concerned
me as I watched Bill Clinton, 45, escort Al Gore, 44, onto the veranda of the
Governor's mansion in Little Rock to introduce him as his running mate. "A new
generation in American politics," the commentators kept saying of these two big
handsome guys, who looked like the co-captains of a college football team.

Between them they represented much of what our generation has wrestled with,
from Mr. Clinton's agonizing over Vietnam and his ups-and-downs marriage to a
smart woman to Mr. Gore's tour in Vietnam and his expertise on global warming
and the ozone layer. Two guys who smoked dope, one who inhaled, one who didn't.
Like a cannon volley came the imagined sound: baby boom Boom BOOM.

What a long strange trip it's been; anyone who predicts with confidence what
November will bring is stupid or arrogant. The politics of psychic exclusion has
been the rule, from out-of-work Republicans who feel the President has not paid
attention to the economy, to conservative Democrats who think their party
remains too liberal, to women who like abortion rights and fidelity in a man.
The ruling principle has been disenfranchisement, whether expressed in anger,
Jerry Brown or Ross Perot.

Both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore are members of a group founded to move the
Democratic Party toward more centrist positions. And it shows. Mr. Clinton went
home earlier this year for the execution of a convicted murderer whose plea for
clemency he denied. Mr. Gore broke with his Democratic colleagues to authorize
the President to wage war in the Persian Gulf. But the Clinton camp probably has
lost little sleep over the loss of hard-core liberals. We are as likely to shift
to the Bush-Quayle ticket as we are to hobnob with alien life forms.

It is the moderates they will seek, a word that is frequently used to describe
Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore. The only ones who cast them as flaming liberals are
the Republicans, who are positioned so unrelentingly to the right that when
Laurance Rockefeller, of the Rockefeller Republican Rockefellers, entered the
primary for Al D'Amato's Senate seat in New York last week, it was immediately
said that he must really be a Democrat.

These two hunky postwar babies should remember that around half the voters out
there are older than they are. And they are shopping. A poll released last week
by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press showed that Americans
over the age of 50 overwhelmingly see a need for new leaders in Washington.

But if those new leaders appear to be representative only of a baby boom
generation that has been televised, analyzed and chronicled to the point of
parody, older Americans may feel disinvited from the party. Crossed Volvos with
a briefcase rampant on a field of ambition is not the coat of arms for a winning
race, not with the shadow of the go-go 80's a blight upon the land.

The political landscape has changed since John F. Kennedy's age was a major
issue. He became the youngest President at age 43; today we have a ticket on
which both spots are filled by men nearly the same age. Experience is not an
issue; both are seasoned and respected elected officials. Fitness is not an
issue either. Every candidate on Mr. Clinton's short list was more qualified to
be both Vice President and, if need be, President than the current occupant of
the office.

The danger in being standard bearers for a new generation is that you must be
most careful not to shut older generations out, as Hillary Clinton learned to
her sorrow when she seemed to be denigrating cookie baking and elevating career.
The folks who brought us F.D.R. and J.F.K. may indeed feel there is a need for
new blood. And if Bill Clinton and Al Gore are seen as two men with the energy
and ideas to make a tired old system new, they could win over both their own
generation and that of their parents. If they are seen as the first hungry
yuppie ticket, looking for career advancement at the polls, they are in big
trouble.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Road to the Nomination;
While Others Shrank From the Race, Clinton Clung to Dream of Presidency

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1968 words


It was April 1991, and the nation felt very good about itself and its President
in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, and a sort of sullen silence had
fallen on the Democratic Party.

Paul E. Tsongas was running for President, but nobody gave him much of a chance,
and George McGovern was thinking about it. None of the supposed heavyweights was
making a move. But down in Little Rock, on a spring afternoon, Gov. Bill Clinton
seemed immune to the Beltway blues.

"The focus on whether the President can be defeated in '92 is the wrong focus,"
he lectured a visiting reporter. "The truth is no one knows the answer to that."

What was clear, he argued, was that the public's attention would inevitably turn
to domestic issues. That the Democrats needed to reinterpret their domestic
agenda to appeal to the middle class. That both parties needed to move beyond
their "hidebound ideology."

So was he running? he was asked. He had never been happier here in Arkansas, he
replied. Moments later, fearful that his demurral had been too strong, perhaps
even believable, he returned to the point. "It's just a question of whether it
should be done NOW," he said.

It has become a heroic cliche of American politics: The candidate off in the
provinces, plotting and planning and dreaming his way to the nomination,
believing while others despair, thinking while others rest, the one whose
triumph seems inevitable in retrospect. But in the case of Bill Clinton, who
will accept his party's nomination Thursday night, there is some truth to the
cliche.

Big Plans From the Start

He wanted the Presidency more than the Democrats who flinched in the face of all
those yellow ribbons and towering Bush approval ratings. And he planned for it
more than any of those who entered the race.

They seem like simple virtues, but are actually quite rare in Presidential
politics: He knew what he wanted to say. He had a strategic vision of where he
wanted to take his party. And perhaps because of all those afternoons in Little
Rock, spinning out his campaign, rolling through the scenarios, thinking it
through again and again and again, he had this ferocious resistance to letting
it die.

That was clear in the most decisive week of the Democratic primary campaign, the
final week before the New Hampshire primary, when Mr. Clinton's candidacy was
slipping away and Democrats were pleading with other leaders to enter the race.
The Governor from Arkansas campaigned with an intensity that was almost painful
to watch.

He stayed on his feet through accusations of infidelity and draft dodging,
through extraordinary rebukes from the public in opinion polls and the voting
booths, through a full-blown journalistic feeding frenzy that had destroyed
other men.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson, who is not a fan, explains Mr. Clinton's success
dismissively: "He survived." There was, in fact, an element of default about his
victory. Most of his rivals were newcomers to Presidential politics who started
late, stumbled often and sometimes seemed incapable of capitalizing on
opportunities that came their way.

Mr. Clinton's strongest opposition, in many ways, was self-created. He struggled
to package his personal life: the past difficulties in his marriage, what he did
during the Vietnam War and even, inexplicably, his youthful experiment with
marijuana. ("I didn't inhale.") His critics said he tried too hard.

Still, one reason the rest of the field looked so weak was because Mr. Clinton
out-planned, out-organized and out-campaigned them.

A Long-Rising Star, A Moment to Shine

He had worked the networks of national politics for more than 20 years. Senator
Sam Nunn of Georgia once described him as the only Democrat to be a rising star
in three decades.

Mr. Clinton traveled the nation in 1990 and 1991 as chairman of the Democratic
Leadership Council. That group, formed in 1985 with the purpose of pushing the
party toward the center, became a crucial vehicle for Mr. Clinton to hone his
message and test it before a variety of audiences.

By the spring of 1991, when the leadership council met in Cleveland for what
turned into the first cattle show of the 1992 campaign, Mr. Clinton was ready
with a full-blown Presidential campaign speech. He outlined the domestic
problems facing the country, from economic decline to chronic poverty to the
crisis in health care. But he argued that the Democratic Party would never get a
chance to address those problems unless it regained the confidence of the middle
class.

Many in the party were steeling themselves for a left-right debate; some of them
wanted it, yearning to see Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York take on the Southern
wing of the party and its latest tribune, Mr. Clinton. But Mr. Clinton deftly
argued that Democrats needed to focus on "a new choice" or a "third way" in
public policy that was beyond the old ideology.

The "new choice" meant that welfare recipients would be put to work (but given
child care and training along the way), and that children of the middle class
would get more college aid programs (but also pay the loans back or work them
off in national service).

His critics saw the "new choice" as the first of many straddles; his allies saw
it as a strategic masterstroke.

He was already beginning to discuss a race for the Presidency with a small group
of advisers. As they met periodically through the summer, it became clear that
most of the prospective candidates on the A-list were backing out, raising
unusual opportunities for Mr. Clinton.

Moreover, Stan Greenberg, Mr. Clinton's poll taker, was arguing by mid-summer
that Mr. Bush was in far more trouble than his approval ratings might suggest.

There were doubts and second thoughts along the way; Mr. Clinton worried about
breaking his pledge to serve out his term, but went ahead and did it anyway. By
summer's end he was in the race, and his campaign began to move quickly. They
set out to win what one adviser called "an early primary of elites," persuading
press, pundits and political professionals that Mr. Clinton was the class of the
field. The candidate delivered a series of policy speeches at Georgetown
University. (A $3 cab ride for much of the national press corps.)

He dominated the cattle shows, particularly a meeting of state Democratic
chairmen in Chicago in November. He put together a campaign staff with some
reach, including expertise on Chicago, since Illinois was the first primary
after the Southern Super Tuesday.

They were winning the primary of elites: The cover of New Republic ("The
Anointed"), the covers of Time and New York magazines. There was a generation of
political writers who believed that the Democratic Party had to recreate itself,
break with the old liberal orthodoxy, to return to power. Mr. Clinton fit their
view, as Senator Al Gore had for a time in 1988.

The Clinton campaign kept thinking it through. The advisers knew they had a
problem with the rumors of infidelity about Mr. Clinton. They tried to defuse
them.

In September, Mr. Clinton went before a breakfast of journalists with his wife,
Hillary, at his side. He said their relationship "has not been perfect or free
of its difficulties" but asserted, "We intend to be together 30 or 40 years from
now, whether I run for President or not or whatever happens in the interim."

He added, "I think that ought to be enough."

For the moment, it was.

Facing Adversity, Showing Endurance

By January, the Clinton campaign was rolling in New Hampshire. Governor Cuomo
had finally announced that he would not run, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska was
suffering from that dread political ailment "failure to connect," and Mr.
Clinton's earnest talk of economic development was striking a chord with the
anxious voters of New Hampshire.

Then came Gennifer Flowers, asserting in the tabloid The Star that she had had a
12-year affair with Mr. Clinton. Then came an article in The Wall Street
Journal, suggesting that Mr. Clinton had tried to manipulate his draft status to
avoid the draft in the Vietnam War. Mr. Clinton, having denied both assertions,
went home to Little Rock for the weekend.

Mr. Greenberg, the Clinton poll taker, conducted a survey that Sunday, 10 days
before the primary. It showed a drop of 17 points, he later recalled. He called
the situation a "meltdown."

There are few things as harrowing to candidates as a free fall in the polls. Mr.
Clinton's ability to push through that final week in New Hampshire had as much
to do with his winning the nomination as all the planning of the year before.

It was a manic final sprint, from shopping malls to town meetings to street
corners, from live television to impromptu news conferences.

His candidacy was widely considered to be mortally wounded. In Washington,
Democrats pleaded with Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas and other heavyweights to
enter the race. The party was in turmoil -- afraid that Mr. Clinton would fail,
and afraid that he would survive, but just barely.

"It was wild," said one veteran Democratic strategist, who added that most of
the Democrats promoting late-entry candidates wanted to see "a dead body" first.

Had the Clinton campaign finished third in New Hampshire, or dropped below 20
percent, it was "toast," as a Clinton strategist, James Carville, put it. "You
could have gone ahead and buttered us," he said.

The night of the New Hampshire primary, when he finished second with 25 percent
of the vote, a euphoric Mr. Clinton dubbed himself the "comeback kid." He
sounded more like the big winner of the night than the man who finished first,
Mr. Tsongas, with 33 percent of the vote. Mr. Clinton actually was a winner; he
got out of New Hampshire alive. The talk of late entries faded.

In Face of Victory, A Feeling of Losing

What was astonishing was how quickly his opponents fell after New Hampshire.
None of them had much money, or much organization beyond New Hampshire. Mr.
Clinton remained vulnerable, but his rivals seemed unable to exploit it.

Mr. Tsongas got a boost out of New Hampshire, but in the succeeding weeks his
message of economic sacrifice, like an increase in the gas tax, proved to have
little appeal for core Democratic constituencies, especially organized labor and
minorities. Mr. Clinton demonstrated the virtues of his ideological flexibility,
attacking Mr. Tsongas from the left as a man who would perpetuate the theory of
"trickle-down economics."

By the end of March, only former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
remained, and while he tormented Mr. Clinton, winning in Connecticut and
fighting hard in New York, he soon faded as well. Mr. Clinton's most dangerous
opposition proved to be his own image, the doubts that all the controversy had
stirred,

"We keep winning but we're losing," he told his media consultant, Frank Greer,
after the New York primary. He had locked up the nomination but was rewarded
with a Time Magazine cover that made him look like a serial killer, under the
headline, "Why Voters Don't Trust Clinton." Forty-two percent of the Democrats
in New York said he did not have the honesty and integrity to serve effectively
as President.

The exit polls became another opponent, underscoring the voters' doubts about
Mr. Clinton; he turned that around in Pennsylvania's primary on April 28, when
the superheated atmosphere of New York had finally cooled and he got his
negatives down, although they remain high in some national polls. Then, in
California, "we turn around and there's this new train coming down the track,
with Perot written across the spotlight," Mr. Greer said.

Mr. Clinton could not have envisioned Ross Perot in all his planning. For a
time, he seemed rattled and angry. Then, as he did in New Hampshire, he waded
back into the fray.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Clinton listening to a question about marital infidelity
during a stop in Portsmouth, N.H., in January. (Associated Press)

Table: "Recap of the Primaries: How Democrats in 29 States Voted"
               Portion of primary voters                    Clin Brow Tson
                                                             ton    n  gas
100%           Total, all 29 states                          50%  21%  20%
47             Men                                            50   22   20
53             Women                                          51   20   21
78             Whites                                         47   22   25
14             Blacks                                         71   15    8
4              Hispanics                                      51   29   15
12             18-29 years                                    47   24   19
33             30-44 years                                    45   26   22
25             45-59 years                                    51   19   20
30             60 and older                                   59   15   18
50             Protestant                                     55   14   21
30             Catholic                                       44   24   24
6              Jewish                                         45   15   33
8              Without a high school diploma                  67   14   10
27             High school graduates                          61   17   15
27             Some college                                   48   23   18
20             College graduates                              42   24   26
18             Some post graduate education                   38   23   28
               Family income:
15             Less than $15,000                              62   17   13
25             $15,000 to $29,999                             55   19   18
30             $30,000 to $49,999                             48   23   21
18             $50,000 to $74,999                             45   23   25
11             $75,000 and over                               38   23   29
               Those who identify themselves as:
67             Democrats                                      57   19   17
29             Independents                                   36   25   27
4              Republicans                                    34   18   32
35             Liberals                                       47   26   20
45             Moderates                                      54   18   19
20             Conservatives                                  48   17   23
               Those whose family's financial situation is:
14             Better today than four years ago               44   24   22
39             Same today as four years ago                   50   20   20
45             Worse today than four years ago                53 20Y1
                                                                    8
18.0 million   Total Votes                                   9.0  3.7  3.5

This table, which constructs a Democratic primary electorate for the nation,
combines vote totals and results from exit polls conducted in 29 Democratic
primary states from February to June. Vote totals are from secretaries of state.
Exit polls were conducted by Voter Research and Surveys. Each state influences
the total table according to its share of all votes cast. Other candidates, who
received 1.7 million votes combined or 9 percent of the total, are not shown.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIDEO VIEW;
After the Uproar, What Has Sellars Done for Mozart?

BYLINE: By KENNETH FURIE;  Kenneth Furie is a former music editor of High
Fidelity magazine.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 24; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1499 words


Haven't Peter Sellars's productions of the three Mozart-da Ponte operas been
amply discussed, even talked to death? Is there anyone who still doesn't know
that "Cosi Fan Tutte" is now set in Despina's yuppie-haven diner by the sea,
"Don Giovanni" in a rubble-strewn ghetto and "The Marriage of Figaro" in the
Almavivas' Trump Tower penthouse? Even people who haven't seen the productions
have heard enough to have an opinion about this most fashionable of directors.
Boy genius? Fraud?

But perhaps the release on video of staged re-creations produced by Austrian
Radio and a consortium of partners ("As Seen on Public Television," the stickers
proclaim) will allow some enthusiasts to take the plunge out of earshot of the
media din. ("Cosi" is London 071 513, "Don Giovanni" 071 511, "Figaro" 071 512;
videocassette and laser disk.)

There are all sorts of problems with these productions, including some specific
to the translation to video. And there's more evidence of goofiness than of
genius.

At the same time, there is evidence of functional intelligence. Even when Mr.
Sellars's thinking is incomplete, wrongheaded or just plain loopy, he is at
least asking kinds of questions that could lead to meaningful performances. None
of this seems to have been discussed much.

Unlike directors who rely on production gimmicks or "concepts" that are at best
impressionistically linked to the works at hand, Mr. Sellars really has
considered the content of these pieces. More important, he has looked for, and
to an extent found, stage solutions that enable these performers to make the
content emerge in the form of musico-dramatic action.

The best example of making content active is probably Lorraine Hunt's Elvira,
the only piece of casting that endures from the original 1987 "Don Giovanni" at
the Pepsico Summerfare in Purchase, N.Y., where all of these productions
originated. (Elmore James, who now sings Masetto, was in that cast, too, but as
Leporello.) Elvira, pursuing the illusion that she might somehow compel Don
Giovanni to return to her, can be an endearing character, potentially one of the
most endearing in opera. But she can also be a nuisance, with all those
whimpering entrances and constant rhythmic emphases.

The punk get-up chosen for Ms. Hunt doesn't stake much of a claim on my
sympathies at the outset. But director and singer have discovered in the very
overemphatic quality of Elvira's music how physically as well as emotionally
strung-out she is.

Even more in the original production than here, her physical life had a
vividness that directly accounted for the music. She could, for example, vent
frustration by swinging her purse in a way that actually created some of those
heavy downbeats. Her pleasing, flexible soprano negotiates the music
impressively, and as Elvira absorbs blow after blow, there is the sense that she
is one gentle tap away from falling over the edge.

This sense of a whole world on the edge, which again came through more strongly
in the original production, could hardly be more appropriate to "Don Giovanni."
Clearly, the transposition to this gritty contemporary street setting has helped
get us to this edge, which should ideally be as much a part of the opera's
original setting, but in my experience never has been. This by itself goes a
long way toward justifying the transposition.

Mozart's music, which you would expect to sound anachronistic in the new
setting, for the most part doesn't, even though the musical and verbal text
hasn't been altered for the purpose. In fact, the conductor, Craig Smith, is a
surprisingly sober collaborator. The fact is that no composer has more closely
observed human needs and behavior, which haven't changed much since Mozart's
time.

(The English subtitles, which of course weren't part of the original production
concept, do reflect some production alterations, like Despina's identification
as a waitress rather than a maid. These bother me less than the titles'
fake-colloquial tone.)

"Updatings" like Mr. Sellars's inevitably don't correspond completely with the
original circumstances. His resettings have value to the extent that, even so,
they find reality in these circumstances that most "traditional" stagings don't
trouble to look for.

For example, in "Cosi," the earliest of the Summerfare stagings, a basic
question is hardly ever incorporated: Why does Don Alfonso not only initiate but
so relentlessly pursue the bet against the perfect constancy of the fiancees of
his young friends Ferrando and Guglielmo? Mr. Sellars starts with the text's
clear indication that there is some unspecified existing relationship between
Alfonso and the maid Despina, and then runs wild. Unfortunately, as with many of
his inventions, you have to read his plot synopsis to get it.

His idea is that Alfonso and Despina have been engaged in a rather turbulent
relationship for several years, that he bought this diner for her to run and
further that he is "a Vietnam vet who is having trouble hanging on." (This
presumably explains his occasional bug-eyed trances.)

The story itself is hokey, but the idea of a relationship between Alfonso and
Despina gives both performers an anchor to the circumstances, and for a number
of situations provides human objectives that performers can enact using words,
music and physical behavior. Despina's arias, for example, which as written are
lectures to her mistress about handling men, become almost the opposite:
attempts to get a handle on her own problematic relationship.

The best payoff for the invented Alfonso-Despina subplot is the Act II sextet
"La mano a me date," in which the exasperated Alfonso uses Despina to
demonstrate proper wooing techniques to his disguised young friends. It's
usually one of the phoniest, most embarrassing numbers in the opera. But because
Mr. Sellars has worked into it an attempt by Alfonso to make peace with Despina,
and because Sanford Sylvan, with his grainy, sympathetic baritone, makes peace
so well, the number becomes gripping.

Act II of "Cosi" in general becomes unusually interesting, because Mr. Sellars
incorporates another element usually ignored: the heightened awareness produced
in the men as well as the women by the new personalities the men assume.
Dorabella is further nudged toward introspection with the replacement of her
frolicsome "E amore un ladroncello" by the agonizing concert aria "Vado, ma
dove," which Janice Felty, the excellent Dorabella, sings beautifully.

The multi-scene "Cosi" and "Don Giovanni" are ingeniously adapted to their
single stage set. ("Figaro" has a separate set for each of its four acts.)
Indeed, the street-aristocrat Don survives very nicely the loss of his
"palazzo." The final-scene banquet becomes fast-food takeout on the steps of the
tenement building in which, improbably, most of the characters live -- with
tunes provided by Leporello's boom box.

Over all, the "Don Giovanni" cast is now fairly strong. The twins Eugene and
Herbert Perry, first cast as Giovanni and Leporello in a Summerfare revival, are
both first-rate. There's a solid Zerlina (Ai Lan Zhu), and a somewhat upgraded
Anna (Dominique Labelle) and Ottavio (Carroll Freeman), though they're not
helped by Mr. Sellars's fictional hokum. (For starters, Anna is a drug addict,
Ottavio a narc.)

To some extent the loss of impact in video form is an inevitable loss of the
impact that may be obtained in the theater. But this loss is compounded by the
visual format: the standard video reliance on close-ups obliterates
relationships of every kind, and film-style quick-cut editing destroys
continuity.

Perhaps because the gimmicky "Figaro," which at the time seemed almost an
afterthought to the more substantive earlier productions, never had much in the
way of theatrical impact, relationships or continuity, it suffers least in the
transfer to video. The cast has strengths in addition to Mr. Sylvan as Figaro.
Jeanne Ommerle and Jayne West are a visually and vocally striking Susanna and
Countess. David Evitts is a tweedy Bartolo. Of the cast members shared with
"Cosi," James Maddelena is a generally plausible Count as well as Guglielmo;
Frank Kelley is a better Basilio than Ferrando, and Susan Larson and Sue Ellen
Kuzma, the vocally strained Fiordiligi and Despina, aren't much more comfortable
as the mezzo Cherubino and Marcellina.

These videos aren't revelations. Too much of the actual behavior is as cliched
as the worst stock-operatic hammery, made worse by Mr. Sellars's fondness for
floor-rolling and explicit sexual imagery. Interpretive solutions too often tend
toward the superficial (Alfonso's and the Count's problem? they're nuts!) or the
evasive (you don't solve Ottavio's essential passivity by grafting on phony
action). Still, some of the right questions are being asked, and at least
occasionally you can see opera singers working with some theatrical support to
justify their life onstage. If this isn't worth a look, what is?

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sue Ellen Kuzma and Sanford Sylvan in three images from Peter
Sellars's video of "Cosi Fan Tutte" -- As part of a new subplot, Alfonso tries
to make peace with Despina, and a sextet that can seem phony and embarrassing
becomes gripping.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE CAMPAIGN;
2 Baby Boomers on 1 Ticket: A First, but Will It Work?

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words


The Age of Aquarius has finally dawned in Presidential politics. Sort of.

With the first baby-boomer ticket, Bill Clinton and Al Gore hope to capture the
White House by projecting youth, energy and empathy for the values and issues
that matter to their generation.

"The revenge of the baby boomers," George Stephanopoulos, Mr. Clinton's
communications director, calls the new fortysomething team.

Michael McCurry, a Clinton campaign adviser, dubs it, "Bill and Al's Excellent
Adventure."

The Republicans' riposte that the Democrats are just a matched pair of
blow-dried policy wonks who, as the Bush spokeswoman, Torie Clarke, sniffs,
"have been bellying up to the Twinkie bar too much."

James Pinkerton, a Bush campaign official, said, "You get the feeling that you'd
invite them over to watch a baseball game and they'd want to switch the channel
to C-Span."

Patrick H. Caddell, the Democratic consultant who has long preached the
potential in finding candidates who could mine the votes of those born in the
baby boom from the end of World War II to the mid-1960's, said: "This wasn't
quite what was in mind. It looks like the chess club took over."

Indeed, the first story about Mr. Gore's selection on the NBC News program
"Today" showed a sound bite from a speech that underscored the notion that the
ticket might be short on passion and long on policy prescriptions. Mr. Gore said
that the nation must learn to "deal with knowledge, especially in its digital
form."

Also, if the many disaffected baby boomers and young people drawn to the Perot
challenge are fed up with insiders and pols of all stripes, Governor Clinton of
Arkansas and Senator Gore may have a hard time camouflaging themselves as true
outsiders.

Mr. Clinton has been massaging the Washington Establishment for years, as though
the capital were an Arkansas precinct. And Mr. Gore, now the junior Senator from
Tennessee, was the son of another Senator from Tennessee and grew up at a fancy
hotel in Washington, sometimes ordering room service from the expensive
restaurant downstairs called the Jockey Club when his parents were away. It was
"Albert at the Fairfax," a Washington version of the children's books about
6-year-old Eloise at the Plaza.

Despite the Clinton campaign's initial fusillade of youthful, vigorous imagery
-- shots of the Democratic partners jogging and pictures of a covey of healthy
blond children -- the Clinton camp knows that generational politics are tricky.

"It can no longer be the Pat Caddell message of 'Our time has come,' " Mr.
McCurry said. "It has to be more carefully modulated and more complicated than
the unbridled power of our generation to take back leadership."

Stan Greenberg, the Clinton poll taker, said: "It's a much more nebulous notion
that these are difficult times that need new leaders. And the age contrast is so
stark between Bush and the Clinton-Gore ticket that it invites people looking
for change to turn to the Democrats."

Focusing on Next Generation

The Democrats will try to capture the imagination of aging baby boomers by
promising to make the country better for their children and by stressing that
they are closer to that generation's more libertarian leanings on social issues
and its greater concern about education and the environment.

"The whole boomer generation has one very central shared value -- they want the
next generation of small children to do better," says William Strauss, a
co-author with Neil Howe of "Generations" (William Morrow and Company, 1991), a
book about recurring cycles of generational patterns in American history.

Mr. Clinton read "Generations" on the campaign plane last winter, and Mr. Gore
offers a blurb on the cover saying " 'Generations' is the most stimulating book
on American history I have ever read."

From 1972, when George McGovern ran against the Vietnam War, to 1988, when
George Bush crossed generational lines to choose a running mate with a peach
fuzz glow, politicians have chased the siren song of the voting bloc of 70
million Americans born in the baby boom.

Diversity, Not Unity

To a large extent, it has been a fruitless courtship. The finicky baby boomers
have not voted as a bloc, and they have not been drawn to politicians their own
age.

Mr. Gore learned that the hard way in 1988. He often began speeches in his
Presidential quest by observing that in 1960 voters chose the youngest man ever
elected to succeed the oldest, and that in 1988 they could do exactly the same
thing. But, unlike John F. Kennedy following Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mr. Gore was
not embraced by his peers. In the Super Tuesday primaries, he ran 10 points
worse among voters in his own age group than he did with older voters.

That was partly due to Ronald Reagan's great paternal popularity with young
people and partly due to Mr. Gore's starched persona. Like the baby boomer's
favorite teen-age sycophant, Eddie Haskell, Mr. Gore has two distinct demeanors.
He can be playful in private, but in official settings, he drops his voice to
sound more self-consciously sincere and he composes his chiseled features to
look more earnest.

In a line that could just as easily have described Dan Quayle, Michael Kinsley,
the columnist, wrote in 1987: "Gore is an old person's idea of a young person."

Many commentators also suggested that Mr. Gore was unable to capitalize on his
youth because of the crusade of his wife, Tipper, against dirty lyrics in rock
and roll.

As Hendrik Hertzberg wrote in The New Republic: "Gore should be riding the baby
boom like a surfer. He isn't. The fuss over porn rock has turned his campaign
into a Tipperware party. The prospect that the East Wing of the White House will
be turned into a platform for moralistic hectoring about dirty songs cannot be
pleasing to much of what should be Al Gore's natural constituency."

This time around, however, with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Quayle also speaking out
against rap singers, things have changed. Frank Zappa, the rock musician, is
already complaining about Mrs. Gore, but she might be more in line with baby
boomers who do not understand heavy metal and who worry about what their
children are seeing and hearing.

"As they've moved into middle age, baby boomer politics have become more
orthodox," Mr. McCurry said. "Now Tipper Gore can stand up and talk about family
values to boomers because they're all parents, too."

Several Failed Courtships

The candidates who have pushed hardest on generational themes have often been
oddly out of sync with their generation.

Prompted in 1988 by Mr. Caddell, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware made an
eloquent and generational pitch to voters. But the values and sentiments and
heroes were all Mr. Caddell's, not Mr. Biden's. While Mr. Biden gave speeches
about marching against the Vietnam War and for civil rights, reporters noted
that he had never been active in such causes.

Mr. Clinton has also had moments of generational wind shear. He admitted he
tried marijuana during the Vietnam War era, as Mr. Gore and his wife have said,
but then became a laughingstock for insisting that he did not inhale.

He also went through a rocky period over his handling of the draft. In a searing
moment, the 45-year-old Mr. Clinton sat and listened as Ted Koppel, the host of
"Nightline," read a letter written by the 23-year-old Clinton thanking a
director of the R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas for "saving" him
from the draft.

But some in Mr. Clinton's generation found the letter unsettling because his
political ambitions were so fully formed so young that he could write of wanting
"to maintain my political viability within the system."

Mr. Gore, by contrast, enlisted in the Army and went to Vietnam as a military
journalist. But he, too, teethed on Presidential ambitions.

'Defenders of the System'

"These guys have less credibility with their generational cohorts because they
are the defenders of the system," Mr. Caddell said. "They remind you of the
people in college who were running for student council, calculating their future
political careers, while you were out in the streets demonstrating against the
war."

Dan Quayle also struck a jarring note after he was put on the Republican ticket
in 1988. Explaining why he maneuvered to get into the Indiana National Guard,
rather than go to fight in a war he supported, he replied: "I did not know in
1969 that I'd be in this room today, I'll confess."

Although Mr. Quayle loved to present himself as a generational leader, and even
made an effort to talk over generational politics with Prince Charles once, he
was largely untouched by the major social and cultural trends that swept his
generation. He spent the 60's indulging in golf, beer, fraternities, girls and
conservative politics, and once noted: "Some reporter asked me who I liked
better, Jim Morrison or Jimi Hendrix. I hadn't heard of Jim Morrison, so I took
Jimi Hendrix."

Joe Queenan, a New York humor writer, explored the Vice President's tenuous
relationship to the trends of the 1960's in a new book entitled "The Imperial
Caddy: The Rise of Dan Quayle in America and the Decline and Fall of Practically
Everything Else," published by Hyperion Press. He said that he has a simple acid
test for politicians who promote themselves as generational candidates.

"You put the guy's body on a computer screen and you try to superimpose a
tye-died shirt, bellbottoms, a headband and a Fu Manchu muschache on the guy,"
Mr. Queenan said. "You try to picture him waiting in line to get tickets to see
Iron Butterfly or the Allman Brothers."

Mr. Queenan noted that, basically, all three men flunk his test. "I bet they
don't have any embarrassing photos they can get out," he said, "like the rest of
us."

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Al Gore greeting some delegates from his home state,
Tennessee, yesterday at the Loews Summit Hotel in Manhattan. (Jim Estrin/The New
York Times) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Talk of Hollywood;
Hollywood Prepares To Confront AIDS In Mainstream Films

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1450 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 12


Virtually every day, the two trade newspapers, Daily Variety and The Hollywood
Reporter, carry obituaries of people who have died of AIDS. The epidemic has cut
an especially savage swath across Hollywood, but, as with so many other serious
issues, the film studios have largely ignored it.

"It's a tough subject matter, and Hollywood continues to shy away from tough
subject matters," said Tom Rothman, the president of production at the Samuel
Goldwyn Company, which distributed one of the few films about AIDS, "Longtime
Companion," which has had a modest success.

Now, for the first time, a major Hollywood studio is about to confront the
subject, but even its creators are skittish about it. Jonathan Demme, the
Academy Award-winning director, refuses to talk about it, and his associates say
it's not really about AIDS.

But the studio, Tri-Star, says it certainly is about AIDS. The movie, which is
to start filming in October, is tentatively titled "Probable Cause." Written by
Ron Nyswaner, whose films include "Mrs. Soffel" and "Swing Shift," the film
deals with a Philadelphia lawyer working for a white-shoe firm, who is dismissed
from his job because he has AIDS. The lawyer, who is gay, decides to sue his
firm, but finds that no Ivy League lawyer will represent him. Finally, he opts
for a smart, brassy, blue-collar lawyer who reluctantly takes the case as the
man's illness consumes him. No cast has been set, but negotiations are going on
with, among others, Daniel Day-Lewis.

Mike Medavoy, the chairman of Tri-Star Pictures, and Marc E. Platt, the
president of the company, said that although major actors have traditionally
shied away from playing homosexuals, numerous stars have been jockeying for
parts. "I've tried for a year to come up with a story about AIDS," Mr. Medavoy
said. "I didn't want this to be like a TV movie or a movie of the week."

Mr. Platt observed, "It was the search for an accessible mainstream story that
has taken some time."

In some ways, the failure of most studios to deal with AIDS so far underscores a
singular -- and unsurprising -- fact of life about Hollywood: the film world
does not quite practice what it preaches. Although several movie stars, notably
Elizabeth Taylor, and producers, like David Geffen, have given considerable
money and time to help AIDS patients, and virtually the entire Hollywood
establishment routinely shows up for AIDS benefits, the studios are dominated by
a dollars-and-cents ethos that scorns harsh subjects. Television, on the other
hand, has proven far gutsier in dealing with AIDS, in several series as well as
television movies.

"The sad thing is, Hollywood doesn't do serious movies any longer, and hasn't
for some time," said Barry Diller, the former chairman of Fox Inc. "Television
has been dealing with AIDS for years, quite effectively, and has taken over that
category of serious storytelling."

Richard Jennings, the executive director of Hollywood Supports, a six-month-old
AIDS counseling and lobbying organization set up by the Hollywood establishment,
said that a number of recent films, among them "Dying Young" and "The Doctor,"
involved men facing death in midlife but avoided the issue of AIDS. "They
obviously wanted something more acceptable," he said.

At the moment, a spate of films about AIDS are planned. These include "Cure," a
Francis Ford Coppola project, written by the novelist Diane Johnson, about the
search for an AIDS cure, as well as "Good Days," also a courtroom AIDS drama,
with a script by the novelist David Leavitt and directed by John Schlesinger.

Mr. Jennings said: "It's sort of like Vietnam. It was only 10 years or so after
Vietnam that we saw major directors dealing with the topic. It was all too
painful. AIDS is similar."

Noir for the 90's

If there's one subject Hollywood craves, it's a Cinderella story, and a gritty
film, "One False Move," is one of them.

The independently financed sleeper, which cost less than $2.5 million, opens in
New York on Friday, leaving a trail of dazzling reviews in Los Angeles, Chicago,
Miami and Seattle that have startled its creators.

Ben Myron, who is producing the film with with Jesse Beaton, said: "So many
times producers manage to get movies made, and sometimes they're not distributed
in the right way or they don't find audiences or they're not very good. Here,
everything has fallen into place. And we're pinching ourselves. It's Cinderella
time."

At one level, the film, which has an opening scene of brutal violence, is almost
a road movie that deals with three desperate drug dealers from Los Angeles and
their inevitable high-noon confrontation in Arkansas with a local good ol' boy
sheriff and two cool and shrewd Los Angeles police officers sent to seize them.
But most of the characters in the biracial cast are far more complex and
unpredictable than the viewer initially suspects. At another level, the movie is
reminiscent of the the film noir mysteries of the 1940's, but with the shadows
of race and sex defining the relationships.

The film was initially given an enormous lift when Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert,
the critics on television's "Siskel and Ebert at the Movies," called it one of
the year's best movies. Not only did these critics praise the movie in two
consecutive weeks, but they also singled out the film in an appearance on "The
Tonight Show With Jay Leno." Critics for publications including Variety,
Newsweek and The Los Angeles Times have also been dazzled by the movie.

The cast and creators are relatively unknown. The film was created by two
Arkansas-born writers, Tom Epperson and Billy Bob Thornton. Its stars include
Mr. Thornton, who portrays a redneck thug; Cynda Williams as his lover, a black
woman desperate to return to Arkansas to see her small child, and Michael Beach
as a smart, chilling murderer who is also black. The local sheriff is portrayed
by Bill Paxton, and the Los Angeles policemen are played by Jim Metzler and Earl
Billings. The director, Carl Franklin, is a former actor who is now working on a
series for HBO about an urban black family.

So far, the movie has grossed about $600,000. Unlike the "Lethal Weapon" series,
in which the violence is jokey and, to many critics, offensive, the murders in
this movie are somehow as appalling as they should be.

"Movie violence, if stylized, tends to diminish real-life violence," Mr. Myron
said. "We wanted this to be as ugly as it really is in real life. We acknowledge
it's very difficult to watch. But it's hardly exploitative. It's a risk because
the film really doesn't conform to any genre. We hope we've made an intelligent
and quality picture."

Honoring 'Human Values'

Vice President Dan Quayle's recent denunciation of Hollywood's "cultural elite"
served as the backdrop for an annual awards ceremony the other day, at which
prizes were given to television writers whose work over the last year depicted
"human values." The Rev. Ellwood F. Kieser, a Paulist priest, oversees the
annual nondenominational Humanitas prizes, which are largely supported by the
television industry. The prizes, totaling $95,000, were given to the authors of
episodes of shows including "I'll Fly Away," "The New Adventures of
Winnie-the-Pooh," "CBS Schoolbreak Special" (an episode about AIDS), "Brooklyn
Bridge," and the PBS show "Wildflower," about an abused girl with epilepsy.

Virtually everyone present agreed that these programs were exceptions to the
normal television fare. But they also took exception to Mr. Quayle's comments.

"Frankly, I wish television were a little more elite, not less," said Grant
Tinker, the producer and former NBC president, in an interview. "By elite, I
don't mean uptown; I mean intelligent. I mean it in terms of the witless,
forgettable television that we're not proud of. I think it all goes back to the
audience. They are finally in charge, as they are in the case of the movies. If
they want to respond and pay money for 'Lethal Weapon 3' or whatever the movie
of the week is, then more movies like that will be made."

Father Kieser said simply: "Ten percent of television is quite good in terms of
human values. But 90 percent leaves a lot to be desired. Some of the series are
the strongest area for human values. The disaster area are movies of the week,
stories about women in jeopardy, tabloid movies, movies of the murder off the
front page. Yes, a lot of it is quite appalling."

As for Mr. Quayle, Father Kieser said: "The Vice President's words on 'Murphy
Brown' were really misguided. Let's face it, Murphy decided to have her baby.
Isn't that an admirable choice? I don't think he understood the show or the
decision Murphy made."

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jonathan Demme, who is to direct the first film about AIDS from
a major Hollywood studio. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

DEMOCRATS IN NEW YORK -- NEW DIRECTION;
Democratic Platform Shows Shift in Party's Focus

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 855 words


Once organized labor and civil rights groups were the fulcrum of the Democratic
Party, and the Democratic candidates, men like Hubert H. Humphrey and Walter F.
Mondale, campaigned for poor people and workers and higher taxes to pay for
Government programs that could solve the problems of the country.

But the views that dominated the party for so long, what was once proudly called
liberal, are hardly in evidence in Madison Square Garden this week. The party
platform the delegates plan to adopt tonight has whole sections that would have
been hooted down not too many years ago.

For some, the passage is a sad one. "Of course I'm disappointed the spectrum of
my party has moved so far to the right," said Joseph L. Rauh Jr., the
81-year-old lawyer who helped found Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal
lobby, and who devoted his life to working for civil rights laws and union
democracy and against McCarthyism and the war in Vietnam.

A Changed Nation

But Mr. Mondale, who in 1984 was the last down-the-line liberal to win the
Democratic Presidential nominationand who lost 49 states to Ronald Reagan in
November, said he was resigned to the change. "It's a different nation now with
different issues," said the former Vice President, who is here as a delegate but
is not scheduled to address the convention.

The reason for the change in direction is no secret. The party was playing a
losing hand, routed in five of the last six elections.

"Losing has a way of focusing the attention of politicians," said Al From,
executive director of the Democratic Leadership Council, the organization of
moderate and conservative Democrats that has seen its stands adopted as party
policy.

"Liberalism," Mr. From added, "lost favor when we quit being a party of
prosperity and growth."

Gov. Bill Clinton and the man he has chosen to be his Democratic running mate,
Senator Al Gore, Leadership Council members and moderates to the core, are
trying to distance themselves somewhat from labor unions, blacks and traditional
liberal causes.

Mr. Clinton jumped at the chance last month to criticize a rap performer and
take on the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and he was almost ostentatious when he went
before the United Automobile Workers last spring and supported a free-trade
agreement with Mexico that the union is opposing with all its might.

No one would mistake the Democrats' platform for that of the Republicans. It
endorses a legal right to abortion, civil rights for gay men and lesbians,
expanded child care programs and higher taxes on the wealthy.

But the party's policy makers of the Roosevelt, Truman and Johnson days,
liberals like Senator Paul H. Douglas of Illinois and Walter P. Reuther, who ran
the automobile workers' union, would have been stunned by many parts of the
platform.

Criticism of 'Big Government'

At one point, the document says Americans are justifiably angry, not just at
Republicans but at "government itself."

Another plank criticizes "the big-government theory that says we can hamstring
business and tax and spend our way to prosperity." Still another section says
labor must join business "in cooperative efforts to increase productivity,
flexibility and quality."

Much of the change is the result of demography. The electorate is dominated
nowadays by voters from the suburbs and small towns instead of those from cities
and farms.

Only 16 percent of workers belong to labor unions, less than half the proportion
right after World War II, and many of today's union members are teachers and
government employees rather than factory workers.

The unions, "are quite subdued," said George McGovern, the former South Dakota
Senator who was the Democratic Presidential nominee in 1972. "They know how much
clout they've lost."

But part of the change also arose from something that happened to the Democrats
in the 1970's and 1980's, beginning with the McGovern campaign: the party's
basic constituencies fragmented.

Before, there had been a few big groups under the Democratic tent: workers,
farmers, intellectuals, blacks. But with the Vietnam War and the violent
protests accompanied it, many union leaders and academicians turned
conservative. At the same time, many farmers became indistinguishable from from
small-business people, and blacks split between those favoring integration and
those who thought blacks had to fend for themselves.

New groups -- homosexuals, abortion rights advocates, supporters of Israel and
countless others -- demanded the ear of the party and refused to be satisfied
with compromise.

A Trojan Horse Is Seen

Finally, the main bearers of the liberal message, Jesse Jackson and Senator
Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, were disliked by a large segment of the
population, and that detracted from the liberal cause.

Mr. McGovern thinks the Clinton-Gore approach is a Trojan horse. "I have a
hunch," he said, "that they're much more liberal underneath and will prove it
when they're elected."

But Mr. Mondale said he was under no illusions that the party had not changed.
"We kind of used up the old agenda," he said.


LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George McGovern at a party in his honor last night at Tatou.
(Star Black for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE DEMOCRATIC PLATFORM -- PARTY PLATFORM;
Party's Quest for a Middle Road: A Liberal Stance in Business Suits

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 993 words


The platform that the Democratic Party endorsed last night puts new conservative
words to an old liberal tune in an attempt to find a middle road between the
unfettered capitalism espoused by Republicans and the welfare-state economics of
the Democrats' past.

The Democrats and their Presidential candidate, Gov. Bill Clinton, are eager to
shed the party's image as favoring a tax-and-spend irresponsibility, and the
platform stresses virtues like personal responsibility, strengthening the family
and market forces. Restrictions on welfare are advocated, and the need for
military might is stressed.

Some Expected Stands

But at the same time, the document endorses Government-paid abortions for poor
women, expanded child care, higher taxes on the wealthy, civil rights protection
for homosexuals, universal medical insurance, unpaid leave for workers during
family emergencies, increases in the minimum wage at the same rate as inflation
and vastly increased spending on public works and environmental protection.

About 20 speakers presented various parts of the platform. Some were prominent
Democrats like former President Jimmy Carter, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Senators
John D. Rockefeller 4th of West Virginia and Tom Harkin of Iowa and
Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado.

Others are viewed by party leaders as showing promise worthy of national
exposure, including Kathleen Brown, the State Treasurer of California,
Representative Jill L. Long of Indiana and Kathy Karpan, the Secretary of State
of Wyoming.

And still others were called to make a particular point, particularly Elizabeth
Glaser, who has AIDS, and Bob Hattoy, a Clinton adviser who also has AIDS.

Carter Sounds Theme

Mr. Carter struck a central theme of the platform when he accused President Bush
of fostering poverty and hopelessness at home and conflict and bloodshed abroad.

And Mr. Jackson, perhaps the foremost spokesman for the party's left flank,
discounted the importance of the party's drift away from old-fashioned
liberalism. "History will remember us," Mr. Jackson said, "not for our
positioning but for our principles, not by our move to the political center,
left or right, but rather by our grasp on the moral and ethical center of right
and wrong."

To be sure, this platform has a different tone from those of conventions past.
Most important, the emphasis this year is on economic growth, an uncontestable
verity, rather than redistribution of wealth, which some Americans find
objectionable.

But the difference is not so much that the liberal notions of the past were
stricken as it is that more moderate planks were piled on. This year's platform,
at about 10,000 words, is about twice the length of the 1988 Democratic
platform.

Over the years, Democratic platform debates have led to walkouts, even riots,
when emotional issues were addressed, including free silver at the turn of the
century, civil rights in the 1940's, 50's and 60's and the Vietnam War in the
late 1960's and early 70's.

There was none of that kind of drama in Madison Square Garden last night.

By prior agreement with the Clinton camp, the supporters of former Senator Paul
E. Tsongas of Massachusetts were permitted to offer minority planks dealing with
a lower capital gains tax, a higher tax on gasoline, a spending freeze and
opposition to Governor Clinton's advocacy of lower taxes for families with
children.

The first three were rejected on voice votes, and the last one was defeated by a
margin of nearly 5 to 2 on this convention's first roll-call vote.

The supporters of former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, who favor
measures like a term limit for members of Congress and a $100 ceiling on
campaign donations, did not have enough support to put their cases before the
convention. Neither did opponents of abortion like Gov. Robert P. Casey of
Pennsylvania.

Strong Abortion Stand

At a news conference this afternoon, Governor Casey called the platform
"self-defeating because it excludes not only pro-life voters but also those who
are ambivalent but believe the number of abortions ought to be reduced."

On abortion, the platform states, "Democrats stand behind the right of every
woman to choose, consistent with Roe v. Wade, regardless of ability to pay, and
support a national law to protect that right."

Earlier in his career, Mr. Clinton opposed public financing of abortions for
poor women but for years he has favored such financing. Senator Al Gore of
Tennessee has continued to vote against spending Federal Medicaid money for
abortions. But in interviews since he was tapped to be Mr. Clinton's running
mate, Mr. Gore has spoken of overhauls in the health care system that would
include abortion financing.

Unlike the situation in parliamentary democracies, party platforms in the United
States bind no one, least of all the President. Franklin D. Roosevelt and Ronald
Reagan were elected on platforms that advocated balanced budgets, but they
abandoned that goal, in deed if not in words, on taking office.

But platforms are important here to the extent that they distinguish the
principles of one party from another. The Republican platform to be adopted in
Houston next month will surely oppose abortion, emphasize development over
environmental protection, stress business interests and private schools and
favor capital punishment and prayer in schools. All that is anathema to
Democrats.

And here is a sentence from the Democrats that would be unimaginable in a
Republican platform: "People should share in society's common costs according to
their ability to pay."

The platform also serves the purpose of painting the image the party wants to
convey on television to the public.

On the convention floor, Erik Silver, a Clinton delegate from California,
understood that principle well. "Our reputation," he said, "is that of a bunch
of wasteful spenders. We're trying to change that image."

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


E. Bright Wilson, former chairman of the chemistry department at Harvard
University and a leader in the study of molecules through their microwave
emissions, died on Sunday at his home in Cambridge, Mass. He was 83 years old.

He died of pneumonia but had been suffering from Parkinson's disease since the
late 1970's, the university said.

Dr. Wilson was Theodore William Richards Professor of Chemistry emeritus, having
trained 150 doctoral and postdoctoral fellows at the university. He was the
co-author of several widely used texts, including "Introduction to Quantum
Mechanics," written with Linus Pauling. He studied with Dr. Pauling, who later
won two Nobel Prizes, at the California Institute of Technology and obtained his
doctorate there in 1933.

During World War II he worked at Woods Hole, Mass., on the improvement of
underwater explosives. In 1967 he was among a group of prominent scientists who
urged the United States to de-escalate the Vietnam War and end the bombing of
North Vietnam. They met in secret with President Lyndon B. Johnson in an attempt
to end the war.

Among many awards won by Dr. Wilson was the National Medal of Science, presented
by President Gerald R. Ford in 1976. In 1983 Dr. Wilson's son Kenneth, who the
previous year won the Nobel Prize in Physics, began a lecture series at Harvard
in his father's honor.

He is survived by his wife, Therese, and six children: Kenneth, of Columbus,
Ohio, David, of Ithaca, N.Y., Nina Cornell of Meeteetse, Wyo., and Anne
Goldizen, Paul and Steven, all of Cambridge. His first wife, Emily Buckingham
Wilson, died in 1954. He is also survived by a sister, Alma Wheeler, of
Washington.

NAME: Edgar Bright Wilson

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MAN IN THE NEWS: WILLIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON
BIOGRAPHY OF A CANDIDATE;
Tenacity and Change in a Son of the South

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 2858 words


By the time he finished his long-winded nomination speech for Michael S. Dukakis
at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, Bill Clinton knew he had bombed.
After all, the audience was chanting, "Get off, get off."

"Had I been Bill at that point," said Samuel Berger, an adviser who was
backstage, "I would have gone out and dug the deepest hole I could and buried
myself."

But what he remembered most, Mr. Berger said, was the way Mr. Clinton marched
off the stage and straight into the press room to face what he knew would be a
barrage of embarrassing, hostile questions.

When Johnny Carson invited him on the "Tonight" show shortly afterward, all of
his advisers said don't go, but the Arkansas Governor went anyway, letting Mr.
Carson poke fun at him and playing the saxophone with Doc Severinsen's band.

"Instead of running away from the problem," Mr. Berger said, "he faced it. He
took responsibility. He walked into the press room and took it. For me it
foreshadowed the sort of resilience he showed in the dark days of the New
Hampshire primary. I saw the same strength then -- confronting a problem instead
of running away from it."

Persistence is a theme of Bill Clinton's life, and it may be the reason why,
only four years after one of the worst-regarded speeches in recent convention
history, he was nominated for the Presidency last night.

It was the same quality that enabled Mr. Clinton to endure the blizzard of
rumors about his personal life.

V. Ted Brabham, a Florida supporter, remembers a private meeting in Orlando in
which Mr. Clinton's own supporters pressed the Governor for reassurance. "Before
we called in all our favors, we wanted to make damn sure we knew where we were
going," Mr. Brabham said.

The Floridians put it to Mr. Clinton directly: Would he be driven from the race
by personal scandal?

"No matter what happens, I'm going to be in it for the long haul," Mr. Clinton
said.

Later, Mr. Brabham recalls, when the campaign was rocked by Gennifer Flowers's
claim that Mr. Clinton had been her lover for 12 years, the Arkansas Governor
relayed another message to the Floridians: "We will ride this storm out."

Mr. Clinton's tenacity is now part of Democratic Party legend. Whether he truly
believed he would prevail or whether he was simply feigning confidence to keep
his troops from bolting may never be known.

But on one point there is agreement: Mr. Clinton convinced those around him that
he would never consider quitting, and for that reason, he can be credited with
salvaging his campaign by a singular act of will.

But persistence is not Mr. Clinton's only asset. He is a son of the
post-segregation South, a man who has always measured his opportunities well in
advance and a leader throughout the 1980's in the movement to revive the
Democratic party by developing a hybrid message that emphasized social welfare
programs as well as fiscal responsibility and economic growth. In speeches, Mr.
Clinton calls it the "third way."

A Long Journey From 'Dogpatch'

Last night Mr. Clinton's tenacity brought him to the pinnacle of his career so
far, rescuing him from the vicissitudes of one of the rockiest Presidential
primary seasons in American politics. And it put him on the threshold of what
could be one of the most brutal fall campaigns in recent history as President
Bush and probably Ross Perot as well take on this gifted, but vulnerable
politician from one of the nation's smallest and poorest states.

That state -- the model for the cartoonist Al Capp's hillbilly parody called
"Dogpatch" -- imbued Bill Clinton with an underdog's tenacity and a poor-boy
hunger for success and acclaim. But if the Democratic Presidential nominee bears
the stamp of a rustic outpost of the old Confederacy, he also bears the stamp of
a strong woman, his mother, and the scars of a flawed man, his stepfather.
Somehow, the chemistry of place and family and a turbulent, but loving home
produced the confidence in Mr. Clinton that he could someday be his party's
nominee.

Mr. Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe 3d in Hope, Ark., on Aug. 19,
1946, to Virginia Kelley, a striking woman whose traveling salesman husband,
William Blythe, had been killed six months earlier when his car veered off a
rain-slicked road.

The early tragedy would come to shape young Bill, who was haunted by the absence
of a father he never knew. But by watching his mother rebuild their lives as she
trained to become a nurse anesthetist, he learned another lesson. Persistence
pays off.

At one of the lowest moments in his Presidential campaign, when he had plunged
in overnight polls in what campaign aides called a "meltdown," Mr. Clinton
excused himself from a critical strategy meeting in a motel room and
disappeared. Later, his aides found him hunched over a pay phone in the lobby,
calling his mother, as if to touch the wellspring of his tenacity, to make sure
she was handling the bad publicity well.

Mrs. Kelley, a blunt-spoken woman with a white streak running through her hair
and a taste for small-stakes gambling, says her son was always "very driven."

"If he was building a little sand castle or whatever, he was determined to
finish what he started," she said yesterday on the NBC News "Today" program.

Mrs. Kelley, who has buried three husbands, provided her son a largely
middle-class life first in Hope and then in Hot Springs, about 80 miles to the
northeast. When she went to New Orleans to learn nursing, she took control of
her life in a manner that was unusual for women of her time, leaving 2-year-old
Bill with his grandparents until she had completed her education.

Mr. Clinton's grandparents ran a store in a predominantly black neighborhood,
and he has said they taught him that segregation was wrong at a time when the
practice was scarcely being questioned in the rural South.

Dramatic Confrontation With an Abusive Parent

When Mr. Clinton was 7, his mother married Roger Clinton, a car dealer, and the
family moved to Hot Springs, a gamy town where the Bible Belt ambiance of
Arkansas was moderated by a thriving local tourist industry based on gambling
and medicinal springs and bath houses.

At 14, Bill had gained some physical bulk and the courage to stand up to his
stepfather, a generally easygoing man who turned mean when he drank too much.

In the "Today" interview, Mrs. Kelley told what happened that crucial day: "He
asked his father, the only father that he ever knew, to stand up, he had
something to say to him. And he was a little slow in doing that, and he said,
'Daddy, if you're not able to stand up, I'll help you; but you must stand up to
hear what I have to say.' And he very quietly, very calmly, said, 'Don't ever,
ever lay your hand on my mother again.' "

Yet only two years later, young Bill Blythe changed his name to Bill Clinton,
accommodating his parents while sealing the loose ends in his own life. But the
tension remained, and Mr. Clinton has said that he and his stepfather were
reconciled only years later when the latter was dying of cancer.

Seen now against the backdrop of a politician who has sought to blend
traditional Democratic social-welfare concerns with fiscal conservatism, the
balancing act with his stepfather seems a blueprint for Mr. Clinton's drive to
blend opposites and find common ground.

"He has always had the most extraordinary empathetic ability," said Thomas
Caplan, a college roommate who is now a novelist in Baltimore. "I think he has a
real keen appreciation for two things: one that he could be the other person in
any situation, and also that luck plays a big role in success in life."

The shaping influence of those early years was powerful. Mr. Clinton's friends
describe him as a man who yearns for control, a perfectionist. They say he feels
profound frustration when events go awry.

His friend Garry Mauro, who is now the Texas Land Commissioner, said Mr. Clinton
is the classic child of an alcoholic. The two men have been friends for 20
years, "but I always felt that he held a little something back," Mr. Mauro said.
"Now I know he did."

Broad Repercussions From Meeting Kennedy

For a time in high school, Mr. Clinton considered a career in medicine. Then in
1963, he was chosen to go to Washington as part of the American Legion program
Boys' Nation, in which participants simulate a national government. There he
shook hands with President John F. Kennedy in the White House Rose Garden.

The black-and-white photograph that recorded that meeting shows only the back
and partial profile of Kennedy's head. But front and center is the eager boy
with an overbite, leaning eagerly toward the President with his eyes shining.

"When he came back the first thing he did was open his bag and present me with
this picture of himself with John Kennedy, shaking hands," his mother said
yesterday, looking back on what she saw as the genesis of his political
ambitions. "And I could just read the expression on his face, and I never
questioned what he was going to do."

Mr. Clinton attended Georgetown University in Washington. When riots erupted in
the capital after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in
1968, he put a red cross on his white car and drove through disrupted
neighborhoods delivering food and other supplies.

He spent his junior year working for Senator William J. Fulbright of Arkansas,
who was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He read six
newspapers a day and had access to committee information that he says formed the
basis of his opposition to the war in Vietnam.

In 1969, he won a Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford and, afterward his time abroad,
went on to Yale Law School.

By then, the conflicts between political ambition and personal behavior had
already begun to play themselves out in the decisions he made about what to do
with his life.

He actively opposed the Vietnam War, but agonized over whether he should serve
in the military. In the now-famous letter to the Hot Springs draft board that he
mailed in 1969, he acknowledged that avoiding the draft could cripple his
"political viability." So he signed a letter of intent to join the Reserve
Officer Training Corps, but he reneged when it became likely that his draft
number would not be called.

As a young man, Mr. Clinton was a devoted Baptist, often walking to church on
Sundays with a Bible in hand when his less-devout parents did not attend. But he
drifted away from religion while at college.

From Law School To Governor's Mansion

At Yale he met the woman he would marry, Hillary Rodham. A bright Wellesley
graduate from suburban Chicago, she had caught Mr. Clinton staring at her in the
law school library and introduced herself.

Mrs. Clinton recalls: "I decided this was ridiculous. So I got up and walked up
to him and waited until he finished, and I said, 'You know, if you're going to
keep looking at me and I'm going to keep looking back, we at least ought to know
each other.' "

The two fell in love and moved together to Texas, where they worked on George
McGovern's Presidential campaign in 1972. Three years later, Mr. Clinton
proposed marriage after buying a Fayetteville, Ark., house that Hillary had said
she loved. The Clintons have one child, a daughter, Chelsea, now 12.

After his work for Mr. McGovern, Mr. Clinton worked in Washington for the House
Judiciary Committee in 1973 before moving back to Arkansas. He taught at the
University of Arkansas in Fayetteville in 1974-76, during which he made an
unsuccessful race for Congress. In 1976 he was elected State Attorney General.

In 1978, at 32, he was elected the nation's youngest Governor. But two years
later he became the nation's youngest defeated Governor when voters determined
to teach him a lesson for raising automobile license fees and elected his
Republican opponent.

Mr. Clinton would later attribute his defeat to his own youthful hubris. He had
pushed a conservative state hard toward a progressive social agenda, and he
conceded in speeches and interviews that the voters had a right to give him his
comeuppance.

After the defeat, he curbed his most progressive instincts, and at the same time
his wife acceded to voters' apparent wishes and assumed Mr. Clinton's last name
for the first time. He ran for governor again in 1982 and was elected.

Learning Compromise, And Feeling Its Effects

Mr. Clinton's ability to adapt to political circumstance -- which his critics
call straddling -- became a hallmark of his career, whether it was in the
ambivalence he displayed about whether to serve in the military or about
abortion.

"What I have seen happen to Bill is he has learned the fine art of compromise,"
said Bev Lindsey, a friend who has worked for Mr. Clinton in the past and is now
the campaign's chief scheduler. "And not compromise out of a sense of fear, but
out of a sense of strength."

Mr. Clinton's career as Governor was threatened when he authorized a state
police drug bust that he knew would result in the arrest of his only brother,
Roger, who was using cocaine and who is now a recovering alcoholic. He has said
he then joined his mother and his brother in seeking family counseling, but it
was not until Mr. Clinton was forced to answer questions about his past during
this year's primary campaign that he began to speak of the episode.

"People now are forgetting that he has had these kinds of battles," Ms. Lindsey
said.

And now, in the midst of a remarkable election year, survival has become not
only crucial to his success but it has also been redefined. Bill Clinton beat
his opponents, beat the naysayers and, last night, beat the odds that he would
never become the Democratic Presidential nominee in 1992.

As Governor, Mr. Clinton's desire to please occasionally conflicted with his
determination to bring about change in a poor state that ranked low in education
and high in rates of teen-age pregnancy. Like many other governors, he decided
that what was good for industry was good for the state, and like his colleagues
in other state houses, he raised taxes, diverting the revenues to school
improvements.

Such conflicts have continued through his tenure in the Governor's Mansion. The
evidence of his words show he has supported civil rights, but Arkansas does not
have a civil rights law. He has cast himself as an environmentalist, but
acknowledges that he made concessions to the state's giant chicken industry in
deference to its outsized influence on Arkansas's economy.

Symbolizing a Generation Of Southern Politicians

It goes unchallenged that Mr. Clinton is bright and addicted to detail. And when
he is relaxed, his quickness translates into a ready sense of humor. But in
private his ever-present public smile often gives way to flashes of anger in
tongue lashings at his campaign staff when something is not going as he likes.

"I have several pairs of earplugs," said Betsey Wright, a friend, former top
gubernatorial aide and now chief flak-catcher in the Clinton campaign.

Mr. Clinton's ability to weather political and personal storms will never count
more than in the next three-and-a-half months as the White House prepares to
shift into full political gear for the fall campaign.

Mr. Clinton has also come to represent his generation -- ambitious and
politically flexible. But his years in Southern politics have lent him a
pragmatic edge, rounded with a ready smile.

"Bill's always been one of those constantly evolving people," said Ms. Wright,
who is part of a troika of powerful women in Mr. Clinton's life that includes
his wife and his mother. "He's a lot better person for what he's been through."

But Paul Greenberg, the Pulitzer Prize-winning editor of the Arkansas Democrat
Gazette's editorial page, is skeptical of the Governor's national reputation and
is troubled by the notion that Mr. Clinton is motivated by much more than
glorified self-interest.

"I've been writing for so many years about the hollowness at the center," said
Mr. Greenberg, who is generally credited with inventing the sobriquet "Slick
Willie" to describe Mr. Clinton as the ultimate accomodating politician.

For example, Mr. Clinton, who has fashioned a reputation as a champion of
education, could not miss the political advantages of having his daughter attend
public school in the black-majority Little Rock system. He mentions it
frequently in speeches before black audiences.

In this year's series of campaign hurdles -- Gennifer Flowers and accusations of
draft evasion in New Hampshire; Paul E. Tsongas and Edmund G. Brown Jr. in
Colorado and Connecticut; hecklers and inhaling marijuana in New York -- Mr.
Clinton put all of his flaws on display and emerged a wounded candidate.

Three weeks ago, he gave a group of talented summer school students in Conway,
Ark. the advice that guides his campaign and his life as well.

"If you live long enough," he said, "you'll make mistakes. But if you learn from
them, you'll be a better person. It's how you handle adversity, not how it
affects you.

"The main thing is never quit, never quit, never quit."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton with his wife, Hillary, and daughter,
Chelsea, responding to the cheers of delegates last night after his nomination.
At left was Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic National Chairman. (Lee Romero/The
New York Times); 1951: Bill Clinton in Hope, Ark., at the age of 5. (Associated
Press); 1958: Mr. Clinton with his saxophone at age 12 in Hot Springs, Ark.;
1974: Mr. Clinton campaigning for Congress in Clarksville, Ark. His bid was
unsuccessful. (Gary Settle/The New York Times); 1978: Mr. Clinton with his wife,
Hillary, after he was elected the nation's youngest governor at age 32.
(Associated Press); 1988: Mr. Clinton delivering a nominating speech for Michael
S. Dukakis at the 1988 Democratic National Convention. The speech was a fiasco.
(Vic DeLucia/The New York Times) (pg. A16)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia, Where Titans Fear to Tread

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: LONDON, July 15


At two separate summit meetings last week, President Bush and other world
leaders sounded tough about what they would do if the Serbs did not call off
their offensive in Bosnia and Herzegovina. But it is increasingly clear that
none of them seem ready to authorize the kind of military action that might save
the beleaguered Bosnians.

The reasons seem clear. In a complex conflict in a mountain country where the
front lines are hazy and hatreds are deeply rooted in history, any peacemaking
effort by outsiders would probably be difficult, dangerous and extremely drawn
out -- a "quagmire," Mr. Bush called it, like Vietnam, Afghanistan or Lebanon.

No country, especially not one in the throes of election-year politics, wants a
repeat of disasters like those.

In Yugoslavia, quick and easy success like the one in the war in the Persian
Gulf last year would probably be out of the question. It took half a million
soldiers to expel Iraq from Kuwait, and it would take at least that many to
separate Serbian, Croatian, and Muslim militias and armies in the Balkans,
British military experts believe.

A Baffling Struggle

Some American military leaders fear that if foreign troops did go into the
Balkans, they would quickly become targets for all the warring factions, just as
the United States Marines drew the wrath of Lebanese Muslims a decade ago after
the battleship New Jersey shelled their homes.

Western military experts also contend that air attacks against Serbian artillery
positions in the hills around Sarajevo would not achieve much without an
accompanying ground force.

Though their leaders usually spoke loftily of reversing aggression and enforcing
a new world order, Americans understood why they should get involved in Kuwait:
it was to make the world safe for Saudi Arabian oil. There is little oil in the
Balkans, and the struggle there seems baffling, a quarrel among faraway peoples.

Europeans are closer to the Balkans, but not all of them by any means see
compelling reasons to get involved. They might have if, after Tito's death in
1980, the Soviet Union had moved in on Yugoslavia. A Soviet threat to Belgrade
then would have been seen as a Soviet threat to Bonn, Paris and London. But the
Soviet Union is gone, and a Serbian attack on Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
military threat to anybody in Western Europe these days.

The absence of great-power rivalry in the Balkans means that there will be no
repeat of World War I, which started in Sarajevo. But it also means that the
peoples of Yugoslavia may be left to fight it out on their own. The most Western
powers have been willing to do so far is to make gestures they hope will somehow
intimidate the warring parties into stopping the violence.

A Force Without a Sting

Last week, for instance, NATO and the nine-nation Western European Union,
another military alliance, announced that they were sending a naval force to the
Adriatic to bolster the United Nations economic sanctions imposed on the
Serbian-dominated Government of Yugoslavia.

But in announcing today that it would send a destroyer to join the naval force,
the German Government promised that the ship would never be called upon to fire
a shot in anger. All it would do, officials in Bonn said, was observe compliance
with the sanctions and send radio reports back to the United Nations.

This, it has become clear, is about the limit of the naval operation. "Nobody's
calling it a blockade," a United States Navy officer said here this week.

Similarly, the leaders of seven major industrial democracies agreed at Munich
last week that they would be willing to provide air and naval cover if the
United Nations had to force open a ground corridor from the sea to Sarajevo. But
none said they were willing to provide troops to do the dirty work on the
ground.

Talks, but No Breakthrough

So the war goes on. Lord Carrington, the European Community envoy who has been
trying unsuccessfully for the last year to get the warring parties in what used
to be Yugoslavia to stop fighting, tried again here today with leaders of the
three major factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There was no sign of a
breakthrough.

"The best thing that's happened today is that they've all three turned up," he
said, as the leaders of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and the
fledgling country's Serbian and Croatian communities continued talking in a
hotel with a European Community mediator, Jose Cutileiro of Portugal, but not
directly with each other.

"I will not sit with a child-killer," said Bosnia's Foreign Minister, Haris
Silajdzic, refusing to meet with the leader of Bosnia's Serbs, Radovan Karadzic.
Lord Carrington said with a sigh, almost wearily, that he had heard most of this
before.

The war has already produced the worst refugee crisis in Europe since World War
II, though the community countries, except for Germany, have so far managed to
shut it out. They may not be able to much longer. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, is expected in London on Thursday,
reportedly seeking support for an emergency United Nations conference on
refugees to be held in Geneva.

"Where there is no will for peace, we cannot supply it," said the British
Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, who began a trip to the Balkans today. But if
stronger sanctions against violence cannot be supplied either, the drift to
wider war may continue.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Serbian soldiers taking a break yesterday during a lull in
fighting in the Bosnian town of Gorazde. (Reuters)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Police Also Fight Against Stereotypes

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 182 words


To the Editor:

Allegations of police corruption in New York City lead me to write. I am a
member of the generation that came of age during Vietnam and Watergate, and had
strong suspicions of anyone in uniform or authority. I was a guitar-playing,
long-haired hippie, almost tear-gassed at a protest march on the Pentagon.

Sometime after I turned 30, I started to teach music at the John Jay College of
Criminal Justice, where I am an associate professor. In my classes I have
encountered officers of tough demeanor sincerely trying to understand how a
symphony orchestra works. I have seen women officers cut their long manicured
nails the better to practice their piano scales. I have heard a police officer
speak knowledgeably and with feeling about the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto, not
24 hours after he saved a woman's life by pulling her from a collapsed building
in midtown.

These unsung heroes are acquiring knowledge of music as part of their education.
I am acquiring an equally valuable education: unlearning stereotypes.

LAURA GREENBERG
New York, July 6, 1992

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

END OF A CANDIDACY -- THE RISE AND FALL;
Running Against His Ambivalence: Five Months of a Not-Quite Campaign

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; The Campaign

LENGTH: 1386 words


The wild ride of Ross Perot ended yesterday as abruptly as it began on the night
five months ago when the crusty billionaire from Dallas appeared on "Larry King
Live" and grudgingly told America that if it summoned him to the Presidency he
would heed the call.

The invitation on Feb. 20, prefaced by Mr. Perot's insistence that he couldn't
see himself getting "all caught up in a political process that doesn't work,"
fired the CNN switchboard as nothing had before.

But that was only the beginning. After challenging supporters to get him on the
ballot in all 50 states, Mr. Perot opened 30 telephone lines in Dallas to
receive calls on an "800" number. Within a week he had to triple his phone
capacity to handle the response, and after an appearance on the "Donahue"
program in March his aides said he received more than 500,000 supporting phone
calls in a single day.

In a political year marked by pervasive mistrust of politicians, Mr. Perot's
clipped efficiency, his can-do image and his mythic success as a hard-driving
businessman struck an immediate chord with many voters eager to reject the
alternatives. Early polls reflected his arrival as the most serious -- albeit
undeclared -- third-party Presidential candidate since George C. Wallace in
1968.

A Splendid June

Starting with 16 percentage points to Bill Clinton's 31 and George Bush's 44 in
March, he had inched by the beginning of May to within 5 percentage points of
Mr. Clinton and 10 of President Bush in New York Times/ CBS News polls. By last
month he had surpassed the Arkansas Governor and was within 2 percentage points
of Mr. Bush.

Mr. Perot stressed repeatedly how important it was to him that he not be
perceived as a politician, and he called for "action, action, action," something
he said the Washington crowd had stopped delivering long ago. Mr. Perot, who was
prodded into his flirtation with the Presidency by a Tennessee businessman and
politician, John J. Hooker, has spent much of the race expressing his
ambivalence about entering it.

He presented himself as man who would rather do anything than be President. The
billionaire, who owns an original copy of Magna Carta and whose office is filled
with busts by Frederic Remington and paintings by Norman Rockwell, said that if
he were needed for the "dirty, thankless" job of rescuing America from "the
Establishment" he would do his duty.

As Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas stumbled through a spring filled with bad
publicity and as the persistently sour economy helped drive President Bush lower
in the polls, Mr. Perot presented the image of a man who understood that America
was broken and who knew how to fix things. "Get it done," became one of his
favorite expressions, and at first voters thought he could.

Bristled at Questions

When asked on a radio talk show about his stance on gun control, he responded,
"All I've ever said is we've got to get the guns out of the hands of violent
people." Asked how, he bristled. "You'll hear a lot before November, fair
enough?" he said. "But not on a 30-minute talk show."

But if Mr. Perot's initial appeal was based on his status as a political
outsider, popularity and the demands of a national Presidential campaign began
to erode that distance. On June 3, he stunned many politicians by announcing
that he had hired as campaign co-chairmen two nationally known inside operators:
Hamilton Jordan, who had helped Jimmy Carter make his long run to the White
House in 1976, and Edward J. Rollins, who ran the 1984 Reagan campaign.

The announcement was seen as proof that Mr. Perot was absolutely serious about
running for office. But reaching into the bedrock of politics for advisers
seemed to many of his supporters like the first real tasting of the forbidden
fruit. How can you run against politics as usual, many wondered, by relying on
the usual politicians?

Heat of the Summer

By early summer Mr. Perot's popularity had crested -- at least temporarily --
and the private businessman seemed to reel under the continual pressure of
Presidential politics. The folk hero who rescued from an Iranian jail two of his
employees at Electronic Data Systems, the computer giant he started in 1962 with
a $1,000 after leaving I.B.M., bent ever-so-slightly to the demands of his
puzzling new journey.

His unofficial entry into the race had foreshadowed his campaign style: he took
to the airwaves and ignored the endless touring that has marked Presidential
contests since 1960. "Why should I have to publish my private schedule?" he
asked early on. Voters, as disaffected with the press as with many politicians,
appeared to agree.

But even through his much-heralded appearances on cable television and at the
electronic town halls that he argued could help him govern the country, he came
under increasingly sharp questioning about how he would provide "world class"
solutions to fundamental problems.

Suddenly, the man who seemed like a political natural on television early in the
year became edgy and combative when challenged on issues. Under the direction of
James Squires, the former editor of The Chicago Tribune who was his chief press
spokesman, Mr. Perot refrained from discussing issues in depth, because he said
he wanted to be "up to speed" before he talked. His promise of complete
positions was never fulfilled.

Frank to a Fault?

At first, his disarming honesty thrilled voters long wearied by prefabricated
answers. (Asked on "Larry King Live" whether he thought President Bush should
attend the Earth Summit last month in Rio de Janeiro, Mr. Perot said, "I don't
know a thing about it.") When asked about the deficit he said that it was a
humbling problem, but that if he could get "the best people" in a room nothing,
not even the deficit, was without a solution.

But the candidate's frankness had a down side, too. On the day the Supreme Court
decided its most important abortion case of the term -- and one of its most
controversial in years -- Mr. Perot, who supports choice for women, said he
"hadn't spent a minute" thinking about crucial aspects of the law.

In the past couple of months, Mr. Perot was jarred by a succession of reports in
newspapers and on television. It was disclosed in accounts by a Vietnamese
official and by Mr. Perot himself that after going to Hanoi in 1987 to free
Americans who might have been kept as prisoners after the Vietnam War, Mr. Perot
and an associate discussed private business opportunities with top Vietnamese.

There were also reports that he had a penchant for investigating opponents in
the political and business worlds. Denying reports that he had employed private
investigators to uncover information that could be potentially embarrassing to
the President, Mr. Perot characterized the accusations as part of the "dirty
tricks crowd" in Mr. Bush's campaign.

Over the past month, as Mr. Clinton regained momentum and the Perot advisers
squabbled over how to conduct the campaign, the fairy tale seemed just that.
Last week, Perot ended his relationship with Hal Riney & Partners, a San
Francisco-based advertising firm that developed the "Morning in America" theme
for Mr. Reagan in 1984. The next day in Nashville he spoke to the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, in his first campaign
appearance before a black group.

"I don't have to tell you who gets hurt first when this sort of thing happens,
do I?" he said, referring to the stubborn recession. "You, your people do. Your
people do. I know that, and you know that."

The reference to "your people" infuriated many blacks. Then on Wednesday, less
than two months after he arrived, Mr. Rollins resigned from the campaign --
taking at least 10 political consultants with him -- saying that Mr. Perot was
simply unwilling to follow his advice.

He had no Vice-Presidential choice. Although his name had been placed on the
ballots of 24 states his organization would have had to work hard to get him on
the rest.

"I don't have any drive to be President of the United States," Mr. Perot said
yesterday. He omitted the tantalizing pledge that began his campaign last
winter: "But if you, the people, will register me in 50 states, I'll promise you
this: between now and the convention we'll get both parties' heads straight."



NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A passerby peered into the window of Ross Perot's campaign
headquarters in Washington after Mr. Perot announced yesterday that he would not
run as an independent candidate for President. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times); "I don't think that he quite realized the tension, the pulling and
tugging and the extraneous ideas that come out about a Presidential candidate,"
said Morton H. Meyerson, senior advisor to Ross Perot. He listened to Mr.
Perot's announcement yesterday with Sharon Holman, the press secretary. (Mark
Perlstein for The New York Times)





TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE DEMOCRATIC TICKET -- BIG-SCREEN SALUTE;
Film Tribute to Clinton Focuses on Simple Values

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk; The Campaign

LENGTH: 587 words


How many old-fashioned American values can fit into a 14-minute film? Nearly 57
varieties, when it is by Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the television producer who
made "The Man From Hope," an intimate portrait of Gov. Bill Clinton, with
commentary by Mr. Clinton and members of his family.

From beginning to end, the film sought to portray Mr. Clinton not as a
charismatic, dynamic political leader, but rather as a man with a modest,
small-town background, no stranger to adversity, who matured into a man who
believes deeply in family and country.

The film wasted no time in sounding its main themes. As the camera pulled back
from a railroad depot, Mr. Clinton began his narration with the words, "I was
born in a little town called Hope, Ark.," and almost immediately cited his
grandparents' opposition to segregation and their deep belief in education.

But Oxford, which Mr. Clinton attended as a Rhodes Scholar, did not come up. In
the great log-cabin tradition, the film included the information that Mr.
Clinton was born into a home with an outhouse in the back, and dwelt on the
family's financial struggles after the death of Mr. Clinton's stepfather, an
alcoholic.

In one of the more emotional moments, Mr. Clinton's mother, Virginia Kelley,
recalled the night her son intervened to prevent his stepfather from mistreating
her. Mr. Clinton, in other words, could be counted on to stand up for what was
right. But he bore no ill will. In reflecting on his stepfather, he said he
regarded him as a good man, more to be pitied than blamed.

When not providing a voice-over, Mr. Clinton, dressed casually in a blue shirt
open at the neck and a blazer, spoke directly into the camera. The use of tight
camera close-ups, particularly when Mr. Clinton spoke on emotional subjects,
like the birth of his daughter, Chelsea, communicated a recurrent subliminal
message: here is a man who has nothing to hide, who can look Americans straight
in the eye and bare his soul.

Ms. Bloodworth-Thomason, the creator of the television programs "Designing
Women" and "Evening Shade," scored a coup in finding film of Mr. Clinton shaking
hands with President John F. Kennedy at a Rose Garden ceremony in 1963, and she
used it twice, presenting the image as a kind of laying on of hands.

The political genealogy also included the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and
Robert F. Kennedy, whose assassinations Mr. Clinton referred to as two of the
crucial events of his generation. Although the 45-year-old nominee mentioned the
nation's anguish after the King slaying and the ensuing urban riots, he did not
mention the Vietnam war as an emotionally wrenching experience for Americans of
his age.

The first mention of the word "leadership" occurs not in a political context,
but when Mr. Clinton's half-brother said, "My brother took over the leadership
role in our family when he was just a kid."

In the end, the film painted a portrait not of a political candidate, a
potential world leader or policy thinker, but a fine, decent American, manly but
sensitive, firm in his ideas of right and wrong yet compassionate, a devoted
husband and doting father, a man who has had his share of troubles in life but
prefers to talk about the troubles of others. Bill Clinton, the film seemed to
say, represented the best that small-town America can produce.

In its final sequence, the film came back to Hope. "All I am or ever will be
came from there," Mr. Clinton said, and then reaffirmed his faith in the
American dream.


LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE CONVENTION AND BEYOND -- MAN IN THE NEWS: ALBERT GORE;
A Life of Advantage, Enhanced by the Will to Excel

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 2; National Desk; The Campaign

LENGTH: 1785 words


The last time Al Gore was campaigning in New York City, he had a problem with
his face.

Up to that point -- March 1988 -- Mr. Gore's face had served him very well. It
is the sort of face a mother would love -- not just the mother in question, but
any mother. It is smooth and bland and with just a touch of plumpness to take
the edge off the planes, and it speaks of wholesome character and honorable
intentions. There is nothing hard in this face, nothing nasty, nothing that
suggests anything dark or suspect.

Naturally, New Yorkers didn't like it.

As Mr. Gore, beaming in innocence and good will, trustingly followed Mayor
Edward I. Koch through the New York Presidential primary into disaster among the
muggers and cutthroats that lurk in the dark alleyways of the city's politics,
the smiling young man from Tennessee began to look awfully like a rube. New
Yorkers like rubes to sell to, but not so much to vote for, and Mr. Gore's 1988
campaign ended here.

The Sidewalks of New York

The political columnist Roger Simon, in his book of the 1988 campaign, "Road
Show" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1990), described the scene of Mr. Gore, led by
Mr. Koch, trolling for votes on the sidewalks of Manhattan:

"Koch leaves and Al Gore stands on the street for a while, stretching out his
hand to passing New Yorkers, who don't grab it. Most don't bother to break
stride. Just before Gore decides to give up and move on, a man walks past him,
digs into his pocket and flips Gore a quarter. 'Here,' he says with a smart-ass
grin, 'this is for your campaign.' At this moment, Gore is $1.6 million in debt.
The quarter flashes through the air. Gore grabs at it, bobbles it and drops it
onto the sidewalk. We all look away, pretending this is not a metaphor for the
Gore campaign."

In the context of the 1988 campaign, Mr. Gore's end was not unexpected -- he had
run an ill-conceived and poorly executed race -- but in the larger sense of Mr.
Gore's life, it was an unusual occurrence. Apart from the events of that year,
the 45 years of Mr. Gore's life have been exactly as one might guess from that
unlined, unblemished face: a parade of conspicuous, well-planned successes.

He was born the only son of one of the most liberal Southern senators, into a
family of wealth and gentility, raised in a grand apartment on the top floor of
one of Washington's great old hotels (which his family owned), and educated at
an elite preparatory school and at an Ivy League college. After a brief but
notably successful stint in Nashville as a reporter and editorial writer at The
Tennessean, Mr. Gore won, in 1976, his first political race, and became at the
age of 28, a Representative. At 36, he was a Senator.

The press office of the Gore campaign is firm on the point: the Democratic
Vice-Presidential nominee is Al Gore, not Al Gore Jr. It is a small thing, the
missing Jr., but it matters. Albert Gore Jr. is that interesting creation, the
son of a famous, extraordinary man. Al Gore Sr. was for 32 years a Congressman
and Senator from Tennessee, the representative, and representative product, of
the same political base that his son calls home, the hilly farm country around
Carthage.

The senior Mr. Gore became a national figure in the Senate, famous and admired
by liberal Democrats for his refusal to sign the Southern Manifesto denouncing
desegregation, for fighting to block President Richard M. Nixon's Southern
Supreme Court nominees, and for his early and outspoken stand against the
Vietnam War.

That Extra Dimension

Asked in a 1987 interview with the Baltimore Sun about her husband's
relationship with his father, the younger Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, laughed and
said, "You remember Oedipus?" No, she quickly added, "I'm kidding. It was like
any father-son relationship with the extra dimension that you had a very
powerful father -- a hero to many people -- and a son coming to maturity and
learning to find his own dignity."

Mr. Gore's mother, Pauline, was once asked whether her son liked growing up with
a famous father. "He hated it," she said, and then recalled a famous family
story. Nine-year-old Al had gone by himself to buy something at an auto-parts
store in Carthage, only to find the clerk unwilling to sell anything to a child
with no money in his pocket. "He told the clerk to charge it to his father's
account," Pauline Gore said. "She asked him who his father was. He just wouldn't
tell her. Finally, he lost patience, and said, 'Oh, charge it to my account,
then."

Sons of larger-than-life fathers tend to become high achievers or no achievers
at all, to try either to surpass their fathers' achievements, or to turn away
from the competition. Mr. Gore chose the first route.

In the demanding Washington prep school St. Albans School for Boys, his fellow
students wrote this of Al Gore, in the 1965 yearbook:

"Al is frighteningly good at many things. Perhaps it is more truthful to say he
is excellent at almost everything he does (which, in turn, is a considerable
amount). Varsity football Captain, basketball and track standout, Liberal Party
Leader in Government Class, scholar, artist extraordinary, Al has stood out in
many fields of endeavor. Popular and well-respected, he would seem the epitome
of the All-American Young Man.

"It probably won't be long before Al reaches the top. When he does, all of his
classmates will remark to themselves. 'I knew that guy was going somewhere in
life.' "

Indeed they did. Geoff Kuhn, a close friend of Mr. Gore's at St. Albans, said
this in an interview several years ago: "We all knew he was going to run for
President one day. Oh, certainly. He has always had a charmed life -- or maybe
it's karma. His wife, his public life, it's all been perfect. No one who ever
knew this guy could even be a bit surprised at this. It would have been
outstanding to us if he hadn't run for President sooner or later."

As an adolescent and young man, Mr. Gore displayed not only ambition, but also
the first signs of what would turn out to one of the most important of his
distinguishing characteristics as an adult: a careful, calibrated approach to
issues, to politics and indeed to life.

"It is a product of his upbringing, I think," said a friend and professional
colleague of Mr. Gore, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "His father was
famous, and he was groomed from the beginning for a life in politics. His early
years were very carefully managed and controlled: the school years at St.
Albans, the summers at the farm in Tennessee, the whole package. It made him
very careful, and he carries himself still in a way that is more than simply
wooden. It is as if there is a kind of shell about him, a partition he can't
quite break through. He knows this about himself."

At a time of exciting but dangerous change, Mr. Gore experimented, but with
care; he walked on the mild side. At 17, he made friends, of a cautious sort,
with Jerome Powell, a black youth who worked as an elevator operator at the
Fairfax Hotel (now the Ritz-Carlton) in Washington, where the Gores lived in a
three-bedroom apartment. Once, Jerome took Al to the Howard Theater, in the
black part of town, to hear James Brown sing.

"He really had a good time," Mr. Powell recalled years later. "I mean he wasn't
exactly boogying in the aisles, but he was clapping his hands and moving
somewhat."

But Mr. Gore's involvement with blacks did not extend to serious participation
in the civil rights movement that drew many white college students south for
voter-registration drives during Mr. Gore's early college years.

Handling the Draft Issue

At Harvard University from 1965 to 1969, Mr. Gore joined in demonstrations
against the Vietnam War, and he served as the Tennessee youth coordinator for
Eugene J. McCarthy's protest candidacy in 1968. But he says he was never tempted
by the more radical, violent tactics of the peace movement, and in 1969, he
decided to go against his own strong anti-war feelings and, facing the draft,
enlist in the Army.

His rationale, explained in a 1987 interview, is illustrative. Although morally
opposed to the war and deeply involved with Mary Elizabeth (Tipper)' Atcheson,
whom he would marry in 1970, Mr. Gore chose to enlist for reasons that had much
to do with public image.

"The main factor in my decision was that I came from Carthage, Tenn., population
2,000, where everybody knew who was on the draft board and who was being
drafted, and I just couldn't see myself going to a going-away party for a friend
who was taken, or trying to walk down Main Street with my head held high," he
said.

The second reason was a matter of family and politics. The senior Mr. Gore was
desperately fighting for his political career, in a 1970 race driven by the
Senator's stance against the war. With his father's opponent openly questioning
the senior Mr. Gore's patriotism, the son felt a pressure not to make things
worse. "It was not the causative factor in my decision," the younger Mr. Gore
said, "but it made it easier to analyze the matter and reach the correct
decision."

His father was defeated despite Mr. Gore's enlistment and six-month tour of duty
in Vietnam as an Army journalist, an event that may well have reinforced the
son's natural caution.

Hard Work and Respect

In his careful way, Mr. Gore, the father of three girls and a boy, has, as a
lawmaker, fashioned a career notable for the championing of worthy, but popular,
causes. He has been a crusader for consumer protection, better education and,
above all, a cleaner environment, the issue he has most conspicuously sought to
make his own, with the publication this year of "Earth in the Balance: Ecology
and the Human Spirit" (Houghton Mifflin), an elaborate ecological polemic that
became a best seller.

It is generally agreed among those who work with Mr. Gore in the Senate that he
is sincere and works hard on the issues he champions.

"He is a very serious person," Senator Lloyd Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, said
yesterday. "It is his way, when he chooses a subject, to study it until he is
very well-versed in it. He is not the sort of Senator others gather around
because he is a backslapper or has the ability to tell good stories, but he is
respected, and liked, as a serious man."

His caution is perhaps also his greatest political weakness. In one-on-one
conversation, Mr. Gore can be charming and funny. On the stump he is often
wooden, although less so now than in 1988, and has the odd knack of putting the
emphasis at the wrong place in his sentences, so that they fall awkwardly on the
ear. He avoids the kind of high-color oratory that may offend -- but that may
also excite.

NAME: Al Gore

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Al Gore dancing at the podium with his wife, Tipper.
With them were their children, from left, Albert 3d, Sara, Karenna and Kristen.
(Andrea Mohin/The New York Times); Al Gore being endorsed in 1988 at City Hall
by Edward I. Koch, then Mayor of New York. Roger Simon, the author of "Road
Show," said Mr. Gore's 1988 Presidential campaign ended in New York. (The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE DEMOCRATICS TICKET: SONS OF THE SOUTH;
Presidential Ticket Sprouts From Soil of 2 Tiny Farm Towns 450 Miles Apart

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk; The Campaign

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: HOPE, Ark., July 14


Both places have telephone books as thin as pocket Bibles and, as unlikely as it
seems, they both now have native sons on the Democratic ticket.

In recent days the candidates have made a point of claiming the towns -- Hope,
Ark., the birthplace of Gov. Bill Clinton, and Carthage, Tenn., home to his
running mate, Senator Al Gore -- as cradles of early thought, emotion and
values, places that despite the 450 miles between them may even unite the men in
some fundamental way.

"I've never been to Hope, Ark., but I'm told it's just like Carthage in one
respect," Senator Gore said when he was invited to join the ticket. "It's a
place where people know about it when you're born and care about it when you
die."

Myths in the Making

In the case of both men, the connection between biography and geography is
complex, since they each spent much time growing up in other places. But both
communities are now caught up in a bit of geographic myth-making by admiring
friends and family, egged on by candidates who sometimes assert that they remain
small-town boys at heart.

Hope draws both its name and location from the railroad, which established it as
a whistlestop in 1873 and named it after a manager's daughter.

Much has been written about Mr. Clinton's modest economic roots, with his mother
widowed months before his birth. But in Hope, as elsewhere, disadvantage is
relative. Asked if Mr. Clinton grew up underprivileged, Falba Lively, his
mother's cousin, grows incredulous. "Bill?" she exclaimed.

"They were a little more fortunate than the rest of us, because we didn't even
have electricity," said Ms. Lively, 61 years old, referring to the farmhouse
outside Hope where she was living when Mr. Clinton was born.

Mr. Clinton left Hope after the first grade, spending the rest of his school
years with his mother and stepfather in the more cosmopolitan setting of Hot
Springs, a resort town. Then he added addresses at Georgetown, Oxford and Yale
to his list of formative residences.

But as parochial as Hope and Carthage may seem, both managed to provide the
future politicians with a broader range of acquaintances than they might
otherwise have known.

Mr. Clinton would often join his grandfather at his dry-goods store north of the
railroad tracks, where he sold goods to black field hands and laborers. Many of
his friends and relatives, swayed no doubt by their affection for the Governor,
insist that the experience planted the seeds of racial empathy.

"That's where he learned to respect the Afro-Americans so much," said Dale
Drake, a 78-year-old cousin.  "His grandfather taught him to never, never be
ugly to anyone, no matter what color, what anything -- poor, rich, or
otherwise."

On a later visit home from college at Georgetown, Ms. Drake said, Mr. Clinton
angered his mother by convincing her maid to quit, telling her she deserved a
better job.

Neither place has produced race relations that fit antagonistic Southern
stereotypes. In Carthage, a picturesque hamlet of 3,500 in the Appalachian
foothills, 95 percent of the population is white, and race has not been much of
a civic issue. In Hope, a prairie crossroads of 10,000 people, a third of the
population is black. So is the town's former Mayor and its only practicing
obstetrician.

If Mr. Clinton has now given Hope a taste of fame, it takes credit for
occasionally reminding the Rhodes Scholar of the people's priorities.

Ms. Lively remembers a visit after his defeat in his first campaign for
re-election as Governor. "Daddy told him, 'You raised the car license fees
that's why you lost," she said.

Mr. Clinton returned to office two years later, and he has not lost an election
since.

Four hundred and fifty miles northeast, Carthage is a smaller, greener and older
place, more hilly and a bit more prosperous.

Median household income in the surrounding county is $23,000, about halfway
between figure of $17,000 in the county surrounding Hope and the national
average of $30,000.

It too was an isolated farming community a generation ago. Like Hope, it is now
caught in transition from an agricultural past to an increasingly industrial
future, with factories sprouting where fields once stood.

The Gores like to tell a story about the whittlers who while their days on the
courthouse steps. They are said to have called Mr. Gore's Vice-Presidential bid
the town's second-biggest event, after the opening of the Wal-Mart store several
years ago.

But Mr. Gore is just one of Carthage's famous politicians. Before him was his
father, Albert Gore Sr., who served in both the House and Senate. And the
previous Carthage generation produced Cordell Hull, Franklin Delano Roosevelt's
Secretary of State.

In childhood, Mr. Gore split his time living in Carthage and Washington, where
he attended an elite preparatory school before moving on to Harvard. But when
not in Washington, he spent summers and vacations working on his father's
218-acre farm three miles east of town. He now has his own home on an 88-acre
plot a stone's throw away.

These days the original Gore farm appears more manor than tobacco patch, with
its chicken shed converted into a heated indoor pool. But in his youth Mr. Gore
sometimes stayed for weeks at a time with the farm manager's family, who still
did not have indoor plumbing.

Like them, he groomed cattle and chopped tobacco, although neighbors said the
family later stopped growing it after Mr. Gore's sister died of lung cancer. The
Gores had more than 300 head of cattle on the farm. The walls of the father's
spacious kitchen are lined with pictures of the younger Mr. Gore showing cattle
at county fairs.

"His introduction to saving the earth was right here on his daddy's farm," said
the elder Mr. Gore, linking early rake work to prevent soil erosion to his son's
current aspirations as an environmentalist.

If it took some effort to make the transition from attending preparatory school
to working as a farm hand, the younger Mr. Gore apparently did not let it show.

"He just had a knack of fitting in," said Gordon Thompson, 47, whose parents
managed the Gore farm. Mr. Thompson remembers traveling with Mr. Gore to county
fairs to show cattle, sleeping in straw stalls, and comparing the bruises left
when the cattle stepped on their feet.

Seeing 'the Other Side'

"He's seen the other side of people who're a little less fortunate than he was,"
Mr. Thompson said.

Mr. Gore's father has even suggested that his son's early friendships with
laborers who were being drafted into the Vietnam war may have influenced his
decision to go, despite the youth's opposition and ample opportunities to join
other privileged sons in devising escapes.

But another picture on the Gore kitchen wall serves as a reminder that this was
no ordinary farm boy. In it, the elder Mr. Gore is dressed in tails, bidding
young Al goodbye as he leaves his Washington residence for a White House ball.
"As we turned to go," the senior Mr. Gore said, pointing toward the photo, "he
hollered out at me: 'Dad, keep that outfit. I may need it someday.' "

NAME: Bill Clinton; Al Gore

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hope, Ark., the birthplace of Gov. Bill Clinton, is a town in
transition where many downtown businesses have closed. Whittlers, right, on the
courthouse steps in Senator Al Gore's birthplace of Carthage, Tenn., are said to
have called his Vice-Presidential bid the town's second-biggest event, after the
opening of the Wal-Mart store several years ago. (Alan S. Weiner for The New
York Times; Robert T. Coleman for The New York Times)

Map of Arkansas and Tennessee showing location of Hope, Ark., and Carthage,
Tenn.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Selling Themselves: Candidates on TV

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1749 words


ADLAI E. STEVENSON never much liked television, and it showed. During the 1952
Presidential race, he refused to appear in his own campaign commercials,
declaring, "I think the American people will be shocked by such contempt for
their intelligence; this isn't Ivory soap versus Palmolive."

Stevenson's opponent, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, suffered from no such qualms.
In a series of 40 television commercials, "Eisenhower Answers America," the
General responded to questions from ordinary citizens who had been enlisted near
Radio City Music Hall. The Republican Party spent almost $1.5 million to put
these impressively corny exchanges on the air.

Since Stevenson's defeat, few politicians have dared to overestimate the tastes
of the American electorate. Visitors to "The Living Room Candidate: A History of
Presidential Campaigns on Television, 1952-1992," an exhibition that recently
opened at the American Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, will
understand why.

The exhibition traces the evolution of Presidential advertising from its stiff
black-and-white beginnings all the way through Willie Horton. Moving from couch
to couch, visitors can watch the most successful and influential commercials
from each election on a series of oversize televisions. As preparation for the
start of what promises to be another made-for-television election, there are
probably few better exercises.

By turns ominous, poignant and vicious, the commercials in the exhibition reveal
the essential goal of political advertising: not communicating information but
eliciting emotion. They demonstrate how a few well-chosen images -- a flag, a
riot, a convicted murderer -- and a mere snatch of dialogue are often enough to
trigger the most powerful feelings.

And they can do so over and over again. One of the most striking lessons of "The
Living Room Candidate" is how often the same anxieties and hopes have been
preyed upon in the last 40 years of television.

The danger of Communist aggression, for instance, has been a leitmotif of almost
every campaign since Presidential candidates took to the airwaves. In a 1960
commercial, a serious and youthful Vice President Richard M. Nixon argues in
favor of civil rights as a defense against the threat of Communism. In 1972, he
reverts to the same theme, using toy soldiers to illustrate his claim that
Senator George S. McGovern is weak on defense. And in 1984, a commercial for
President Ronald Reagan shows a bear lumbering through the woods to stress the
need for continuing vigilance.

"Isn't it smart to be as strong as the bear," the narrator of the commercial
asks, "if there is a bear?"

Like campaign themes, advertising techniques, too, it seems, are constantly
being recycled. In much the same way that Eisenhower answers ordinary citizens
in 1952, Mr. McGovern surrounds himself with average Americans in his 1972 ad
campaign. In 1976, President Gerald R. Ford's ad men ask Georgians their opinion
of Gov. Jimmy Carter and string together the most unflattering responses. Four
years later, President Jimmy Carter's ad team goes to California and does the
same thing to Ronald Reagan.

"Reagan scares me," one Californian says. "He really scares me."

Listening to all the anguished talk after the 1988 Presidential campaign, one
would have thought that negative advertising was some kind of new invention,
like high-definition television. But as visitors to "The Living Room Candidate"
will discover, there have been few genuine innovations in campaign advertising
since the early 1960's.

Indeed, try as they might, it will be tough for President Bush or Gov. Bill
Clinton to match the sheer savagery of the advertising campaign President Lyndon
B. Johnson ran against Senator Barry Goldwater in 1964. The slogan for the
campaign was "Vote for President Johnson Nov. 3: The Stakes Are Too High for You
to Stay Home." Its message: Mr. Goldwater was just as likely to blow the country
up as to govern it.

In a commercial from that campaign that was innocently titled "Ice Cream Cone,"
a little girl energetically licks away while the narrator reminds viewers about
the fallout that contaminated milk before the nuclear-test-ban treaty. "Now
there's a man who wants to be President of the United States," she says, "and he
doesn't like this treaty." In another ad, a saw cuts through a wooden puzzle of
the United States map while the narrator notes that Mr. Goldwater once suggested
floating the East Coast out to sea.

For its terrifying cleverness, the Johnson campaign's famous "Daisy" ad still
remains one of the most brilliant negative ads ever made. A little girl counts
to 10 while pulling the petals off a daisy; the camera then focuses ominously on
the pupils of her eyes and a male voice begins a countdown that ends with the
detonation of a nuclear bomb.

Mr. Goldwater's name is never mentioned in the "Daisy" ad, but its meaning is
clear. The ad was broadcast only once -- during NBC's "Movie of the Week" --
before it was withdrawn under pressure, but because of the controversy it
provoked it was replayed dozens of times on the news, and the "daisy girl"
landed on the cover of Time magazine.

The Johnson ad campaign succeeded in throwing Mr. Goldwater on the defensive;
the Arizona Senator's own commercials are almost all responses to the Johnson
campaign's charges. In one ad, for instance, Mr. Goldwater says to an aging
President Eisenhower, "Our opponents are referring to us as warmongers."

"Tommyrot!" Eisenhower declares.

Defensiveness vs. Swagger

Based on the exhibition, such defensive commercials would seem to be a sure sign
of a doomed campaign. Watching the McGovern, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis and late
Carter ads, one can't help sensing the desperation of their efforts. In
contrast, the swagger of the 1980's Reagan and Bush ads project inevitable
victory.

The Reagan campaign's Madison Avenue-style "Morning in America" advertisements
of 1984 depict a gauzy small-town world so preciously perfect one would have
thought the country had not a care in the world. And the Bush campaign's
scornful attacks on Mr. Dukakis in 1988 suggest that a vote for this
Massachusetts Governor is not so much an error in political judgment as an act
of errant stupidity.

In addition to the ads, which will be on continuous display through Jan. 24,
there are special screenings each week. This weekend, the four Nixon-Kennedy
debates are being shown, along with Senator John F. Kennedy's famous speech
answering concerns about his Roman Catholicism and a "Person to Person"
interview with Richard and Pat Nixon. Future screenings include debates between
Mr. Carter and Mr. Ford, Mr. Bush and Geraldine A. Ferraro, and Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo's keynote speech to the Democratic National Convention in 1984.

Making one's way through the entire exhibition takes several hours, but visitors
should not shortchange the political commercials from the early days of
television. For it's unlikely that we'll soon see again anything quite like the
chanteuse in the black cocktail dress, who sang in behalf of the recalcitrant
Stevenson:
 I love the Gov,

The Governor of Illinois.

He is the Gov

Who brings the dove

Of peace and joy!


"Debates of the Past"<HE

'The Living Room Candidate: A History of Presidential Campaigns on Television,
1952-1992," an exhibition of campaign commercials and other programming, can be
seen through Jan. 24 at the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at
36th Street, Astoria, Queens. More than 150 commercials will be shown
continuously on 11 television monitors during museum hours. In addition, there
will be special screenings of historical debates, speeches and political
programs. Museum hours are Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4 P.M., and
Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M. Screenings are free with museum admission:
$5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for students and children under age 12.
Information: (718) 784-0077. Here is a schedule of the special screenings
through Labor Day.

Today

"NIXON-KENNEDY DEBATE NO. 1 (Sept. 26, 1960). 1:30 P.M. (Also tomorrow and
Sunday at 1 P.M. and Tuesday through next Friday at 1:30 P.M.)

Tomorrow

"J. F. K.'s HOUSTON MINISTERIAL SPEECH" AND "RICHARD NIXON'S CONVENTION
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH (1960). 2:30 P.M.

"NIXON-KENNEDY DEBATE NO. 2" (Oct. 7, 1960). 4 P.M.

Sunday

"NIXON-KENNEDY DEBATE NO. 3" (Oct. 13, 1960). 2:30 P.M.

"NIXON-KENNEDY DEBATE NO. 4" (Oct. 21, 1960). 4 P.M.

July 25

"CONVERSATION AT GETTYSBURG" AND "THE PEOPLE SPEAK" (1964). 1 P.M. (Also July
26, Aug. 1 and 2 at 1 P.M.)

"NIXON: MAN IN THE ARENA" AND "WHAT MANNER OF MAN?" (1968). 2:30 P.M. (Also July
26, Aug. 1 and 2 at 2:30 P.M. and Tuesdays through Fridays from July 28 to Aug.
7 at 1:30 P.M.)

"CHANGE WITHOUT CHAOS" AND "GEORGE MCGOVERN'S VIETNAM SPEECH" (1972) 4:30 P.M.
(Also July 26 and Aug. 1 and 2 at 4:30 P.M.)

Aug. 8

"FORD AND CARTER ELECTION EVE SPECIALS" (1976). 12:30 P.M. (Also Aug. 9 at 12:30
P.M. and Aug. 11 through 14 at 1:30 P.M.)

"FORD-CARTER DEBATE No. 1" (Sept. 23, 1976). 2 P.M.

"FORD-CARTER DEBATE No. 2" (Oct. 6, 1976). 4 P.M.

 Aug. 9

"FORD-CARTER DEBATE No. 3" (Oct. 22, 1976). 2 P.M.

"MONDALE-DOLE DEBATE" (Oct. 15, 1976). 4 P.M.

Aug. 15

"THE PRESIDENT" AND "REAGAN'S ELECTION EVE SPEECH" (1980). 1 P.M. (Also Aug. 16
at 1 P.M.)

"CARTER-REAGAN DEBATE" (Oct. 28 1980). 2:30 P.M. (Also Aug. 16 at 2:30 P.M. and
Aug. 18 through Aug. 21 at 1:30 P.M.)

"REAGAN-ANDERSON DEBATE" (Sept. 21 1980). 4:30 P.M. (Also Aug. 16 at 4:30 P.M.)

Aug. 22

"MARIO CUOMO'S KEYNOTE SPEECH" AND "REAGAN'S CONVENTION FILM" (1984). 1 P.M.
(Also Aug. 23, 29 and 30 at 1 P.M.)

"MONDALE-REAGAN DEBATE NO. 1" (Oct. 7, 1984). 2:30 P.M. (Also Aug. 29 at 2:30
P.M.).

"MONDALE-REAGAN DEBATE NO. 2" (Oct. 21, 1984). 4:15 P.M. (Also Aug. 23, 29 and
30 at 2:30 P.M.)

Aug. 23

"FERRARO-BUSH DEBATE" (Oct. 11, 1984). 4:15 P.M. (Also Aug. 30 at 4:15 P.M. and
Tuesdays through Fridays at 1:30 P.M. from Aug. 25 to Sept. 4.)

Sept. 5

"BUSH-DUKAKIS DEBATE NO. 1" (Sept. 25. 1988). 1 P.M. (Also Sept. 6, 12 and 13 at
1 P.M.)

"BUSH-DUKAKIS DEBATE NO. 2" (Oct. 13, 1988). 2:30 P.M. (Also Sept. 12 at 2:30
P.M.)

"JESSE JACKSON'S DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION SPEECH" AND "JACKSON ADS BY
SPIKE LEE" (1988). 4:30 P.M. (Also Sept. 6, 12 and 13 at 4:30 P.M.)

Sept. 6

"QUAYLE-BENTSEN DEBATE" (Oct. 5, 1988). 2:30 P.M. (Also Sept. 13 at 2:30 P.M.)

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dwight D. Eisenhower's 1952 Presidential campaign commercial;
The 1964 "daisy girl" commercial made for Lyndon B. Johnson; George S.
McGovern's 1972 documentary-style commercial (pg. C1); The "revolving door"
advertisement from George Bush's 1988 campaign (pg. C5) (The American Museum of
the Moving Image)

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Heartland;
Clinton Is Reaching Restless Reagan Democrats

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: HOMETOWN, Ill., July 17


When Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas took to the podium to accept the Democratic
nomination for the Presidency and wax moderate about the needs of working
people, he was likely hoping that a guy like Joe Madden was listening from his
sky-blue velour recliner, nodding in agreement. And he was.

Mr. Madden, a maintenance supervisor in this working-class suburb southwest of
Chicago, is a Democrat's dream. He is white, male and suburban, a family man who
is a Democrat at heart, but was stolen away by the Republicans many elections
ago.

He lives in a town full of Reagan Democrats and Kmart Republicans, a tidy suburb
of tract homes in Buick country, where a majority of citizens, regardless of
their party affiliation, have voted Republican for the last 12 years, twice for
Ronald Reagan and once for George Bush.

Like most of his neighbors and millions of suburbanites across the nation, the
58-year-old Mr. Madden is the kind of voter the Democrats have been trying, and
failing, to win over for years.

Willing This Time

But this time, people like Mr. Madden seem willing to believe in them. He and
more than a dozen other voters interviewed here since the closing of the
Democratic convention on Thursday night said they felt betrayed by the
Republicans and were looking over the fence again.

After Governor Clinton's acceptance speech that night Mr. Madden turned off his
wide-screen television feeling better about Democrats than he had since he cast
his last vote for a Democrat, John F. Kennedy in 1960. For now, he said, with
the economy stalled, the Arkansas Governor has his vote.

"I feel he's going to bring the country together," Mr. Madden said. "We're deep
in the hole. If he can do half of what he said, four years from now we'll be a
much better country."

He sighed when asked about the last vote he cast, the one for President Bush. "I
can't see voting for him again," Mr. Madden said. "He's a big wheeler and
dealer. The country's going backward instead of forward. We fell for his
promises and what did we get? There's too much money going to foreign countries
when we got problems right here at home. Bush has been feeding the big guys. The
working people can't carry the load anymore."

Hometown (population 4,769) is an unpretentious, aluminum-siding kind of town,
where houses have pickup trucks out front and basketball hoops out back, where
adult children live a few doors down from their parents and where the mayor has
hung a poster in his office that says, "I Am the Flag."

God and country are important here. And the Democrats' red-white-and-blue
banners, the close-up shots of Mr. Clinton's mother, her eyes misty, the cheers
and banners and orchestrated show of unity during the Democratic National
Convention were not lost of Hometown residents.

"I'm listening," said Ronald Jeffrey, an electrician in Hometown. "It's one of
the best tickets they've had in a long time. They seem more unified. There isn't
all the bickering. They seem to be more towards the center. I like what I see
and I'm ready for a change. What wrong can this ticket do?"

Mr. Jeffrey, 42, is the kind of American who remembers going to ball games
growing up and getting chills down his spine whenever he heard the national
anthem. So when the Democrats play the patriotism card it seems almost a homing
device for people like Mr. Jeffrey.

It is a strategy that for now is playing well in Hometown. The town has seen its
population and tax base decrease in the years since Mr. Reagan took office. Many
point to the local shopping center as proof that the Republicans have presided
over a deteriorating economy.

"We're hurting," said Mr. Madden, who is the maintenance supervisor at the
shopping center, and serves as the town's director of public works in his
off-hours. "We have seven vacant stores. We had a food store, a bakery, a
children's store, a shoe store, a Kresge's. All gone."

Mention George Bush here, and unemployment, recession and drugs spill from many
people's lips. They seem infuriated that President Bush reneged on his pledge of
no new taxes. They express a deep sense of alienation from the President, seeing
him as an advocate for the elite, not them.

"He goes on vacation too much," Mr. Jeffrey said. "Every time you look around
he's at Kennebunkport or something. Who's running the shop?"

What on the face of it would seem to be Mr. Bush's strengths are seen as
weaknesses here. For one, Hometown residents tend to view Mr. Bush's first term
as really the third term of the Reagan-Bush Administration. The argument that he
needs a second term to complete the programs of the first -- an incumbent's
standard line -- does not wash here.

"They've had 12 years to do something, and they haven't," said Joan Doberwits,
the town clerk, who like most everyone else is a registered Democrat who has
been voting Republican since 1980. "In my heart, I feel Bush has had enough
time. He's had his chance."

William Cochrane, a telephone repairman, who has not voted for a Democrat since
Harry S. Truman, said: "He's been a do-nothing President. I don't think Bush has
done anything. Personally, I feel let down by the man."

The Persian Gulf war is a touchy subject with many residents, who say they are
angry that Saddam Hussein is still in power.

"They spent millions of dollars and accomplished nothing," Mr. Corcoran said.
"It was such a waste of time."

On the other hand, people seem not as troubled by Mr. Clinton's debits. Gennifer
Flowers is long forgotten, whether he did or did not inhale is, to them,
talk-show grist and people, for now, seem to be looking past his attempts to
avoid Vietnam.

The charges of womanizing, in particular, seem to be a nonissue, and some seemed
impressed that Gov. Clinton had weathered the scrutiny. "That kind of gossip
irritates me," said Nancy Jeffrey, a nurse who is married to Mr. Jeffrey and has
voted Republican with him.

Mr. Jeffrey sees both President Bush and Governor Clinton as morally flawed.
"Bush's son was involved in the savings and loan mess," Mr. Jeffrey said. "You
could sling mud back and forth all night long. They cancel each other out."

Some residents here say they like the idea of a Democratic Congress and
President working together to get something done and others simply like the fact
that Bill Clinton is not George Bush, especially now that Ross Perot is no
longer in the picture.

"If one has to get in, let it be Clinton," came the voice of a retiree, Patricia
Eisner, who until Thursday was a Perot supporter. "I want to believe what
Clinton says because it sounds great. But face it, none of them would say what
you wouldn't want to hear. They'd be a fool."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "We're deep in the hole," said Joe Madden, a maintenance
supervisor in Hometown, Ill., a suburb of Chicago. "If he can do half of what he
said, four years from now we'll be a much better country." (Jack Spratt for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Hindsight;
Texas-Size Failure

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words


In the beginning, and also in the end, the promise and the problem with the
campaign of Ross Perot was Ross Perot.

It was not ideology, or party affiliation, or political experience that gave
rise to the odd quasi-candidacy of a short tycoon from Texas. It was himself;
the appeal of a President Perot was simply Mr. Perot. This was true for the
millions of people who rushed to support him, and it was true for Mr. Perot,
too.

When he announced his willingness to serve, on the cable television program
"Larry King Live," five months ago, that was all he offered to voters -- himself
-- in a take-it-or-leave-it shot: "If voters in all 50 states put me on the
ballot -- not 48 or 49 states, but all 50 -- I will agree to run."

And no matter the immediate cause of his angry, abrupt good-bye on Thursday, the
root reasons of Mr. Perot's epic failure are not things politics did to Mr.
Perot, but things Mr. Perot brought to politics.

Contempt for Political Process

On its most basic level, what proved disastrous about Mr. Perot as a candidate
was precisely the same thing that made him initially so attractive to so many.
He had, and displayed, utter contempt for the political process, which he liked
to dismiss as "irrelevant to selecting a good candidate."

But the process cannot be irrelevant to selecting a candidate, for the
inescapable fact that it produces that candidate. This is something neither Mr.
Perot nor his top advisers ever grasped.

In an interview yesterday, Thomas D. Barr, one of New York's most prominent
lawyers and one of Mr. Perot's closest aides, summed up what he and Mr. Perot
had learned over the last five months. It was not that they had mishandled
anything, but that the process had mishandled them.

"The great lesson of this was that a person of quality -- and Ross Perot is
certainly that -- who could have given a great deal to the country has been
seriously discouraged and disinterested in doing so," he said. "There is just so
much of the process that is wretched and onerous and appalling, and what happens
is that this causes an exclusionary effect, a sort of natural selection process,
so that there are only a very few people -- Bill Clinton, for example -- who are
prepared to go through this."

Mr. Perot's unwillingness to put up with the wretched, the onerous and the
appalling may have stemmed in part, Mr. Barr suggested, from the fact that he
began his unorthodox drive for the Presidency without any real seriousness of
intent. "I think he said what he said on the Larry King show because he believed
that this would bring to an end the talk of 'Run, Ross, Run.' When it went the
other way, he was stunned. This wasn't something he really wanted to do."

'Not Prepared to Be Ridiculed'

What Mr. Perot hated most about the process was being criticized by the press,
or attacked by the other side.

"He expected rock throwing," Mr. Barr said. "But I think he was not prepared to
be ridiculed."

Mr. Perot showed no qualms about gutter-fighting. He was for months nearly
ubiquitous on television news and talk shows, responding to criticism and
offering criticism of his own in some of the most colorful and harshest
political language heard in years.

Reporters who asked questions or raised accusations he did not like were
"whining" about "schoolgirl" stuff, were "lying," and were subject to "flights
of fantasy."

Mr. Perot openly and repeatedly questioned President Bush's masculinity, saying,
in connection with Mr. Bush's decision to wage war over the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait, "I don't have to prove my manhood by sending anyone to war." He once
referred to Mr. Bush's Texas campaign coordinator, Jim Oberwetter, as "Jim
Bedwetter."

But Mr. Perot's style of fighting proved ineffective and, to many, increasingly
unattractive. What had once been seen in benign terms -- as forthright, feisty
candor -- metastasized into a more malign image, that of a bully.

A professional politician with such a serious image problem, and suffering as
well from the sort of self-perpetuating negative press that is nearly invariably
fatal, would probably have countered with an immediate, professionally managed
media campaign. This is what the Democratic Presidential nominee, Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas, has done to overcome image problems far more serious than
any Mr. Perot faced.

Disdain for Political Handlers

But Mr. Perot's disdain for the political process included the professionals of
that process, and he made it clear he wanted to do no business with them. "What
you see is what you get," he said in an interview with The New York Times in
March. "I'm not going to be one of those people who hires handlers and image
makers."

When Mr. Perot finally did hire political professionals -- Edward J. Rollins, a
Republican, and Hamilton Jordan, a Democrat, along with a dozen lesser lights,
he resisted their strong advice to mount an image-building advertising campaign.
He dismissed Hal Riney & Partners, an advertising firm that had shot a number of
elaborately filmed interviews with Perot volunteers. It was this refusal by Mr.
Perot to follow his counsel that led to Mr. Rollins's quitting the campaign the
day before Mr. Perot pulled the plug completely.

"The whole method of selling a candidate in a political campaign is something I
can't accept very easily as being honest or appropriate, and I think Ross had
real problems with it, too," Mr. Barr said. "And he didn't like the idea of
spending money to send people junk mail they would just throw in the
wastebasket, or spending money on the kind of television commercial he wouldn't
watch himself."

In "Perot: An Unauthorized Biography" (Business One Irwin, 1990), Todd Mason
describes Mr. Perot's disregard of professionals as an article of abiding faith.
Mr. Perot's world, in Mr. Mason's descriptions, is divided into two camps:
"professionals," who are stupid, lazy or unimaginative, and Mr. Perot, who,
along with a small band of loyal lieutenants, alone sees the true path.

Problem With Ideas

The religion of anti-professionalism surfaces repeatedly in the story of Mr.
Perot's life. To cite one example, there is the case of Mr. Perot's 1971
takeover of the huge Wall Street brokerage firm du Pont Flore Gorgan & Company.
He derided the brokers of the firm as incompetent, and instituted sweeping
changes in work rules that encouraged great numbers of them to quit. He lost
more than $60 million before he quit.

Beyond his problem with the process and the professionals, Mr. Perot had a
problem with the hard currency of politics: ideas. He did not seem to like them,
did not want to talk about them, and apparently did not think they were of any
concern to voters. His favorite phrase to reporters pushing for any sort of
details on just what he thought about the nation's concerns was eloquent in its
utter dismissal. "See," he would say, "it's simple."

It was his frequent claim that only journalists cared about such things. After
much pressing, he said in May that he would arrive at a set of policy positions
in 60 days (he never did), but even then, he sneered at the notion that it was
really necessary. All the people really needed, or wanted, he seemed to believe,
was Ross Perot, himself.

In a Time magazine interview in May, he offered this typical observation: "The
phone banks are going crazy with working folks saying 'Why are you wasting your
time on this? We're not interested in your damn positions, Perot. We're
interested in your principles.' "

By July, even volunteers in the Perot headquarters in Dallas were telling
reporters that they needed to hear some specifics from their candidate.

With no core of ideology to guide him, Mr. Perot was peculiarly vulnerable to
the pitfalls of political dialogue. Nuances seemed beyond him; a few televised
remarks concerning homosexuals landed him in a mess he clearly did not expect or
fully understand, and it took months of negotiations with gay groups to work his
way out. No sooner had he done that, than he was back in trouble again, with
remarks before a convention of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People that struck many in his audience as patronizing and insensitive.

He concluded his political adventure in a way that, like his abundant belief in
himself and his disdain for professionals, is part of the long pattern of his
life. When events went not to his liking, he had, all his adult life, quit
things: the Navy, the search for missing American servicemen in Vietnam, Wall
Street, General Motors. On Thursday, with his name having been placed on the
ballot by thousands of volunteers in nearly half of the 50 states, he quit one
more time.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot said yesterday that if pressure from his grass-roots
supporters was great enough, he would leave his name on the ballot in the 24
states where he had already qualified. Mr. Perot waited at Adams Field in Little
Rock, Ark., before appearing at a rally in May. (David Gottschalk for The New
York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Prime of Tipper Gore

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 3; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2255 words


THE times seem to have caught up with Tipper Gore, wife of the the Democratic
candidate for Vice President. A vision of blondness, she gathered her four
beaming children and her broad-shouldered husband for a family tableau on the
convention podium last Thursday night and laid claim to being an updated version
of the traditional political wife.

Mrs. Gore and her friends are trying to undo the cartoonish image of her as the
prissy, humorless Carry Nation of rock-and-roll. She's really funky and
soft-hearted, they say. Her assistant faxed a newspaper article that described
her as a woman "whose passion for homeless, poor and mentally ill children
carries a world of weight."

In an interview last week, Mrs. Gore sheepishly confessed that she had just
bought the double compact disk of the Grateful Dead's "Europe '72" album.
According to an article in Entertainment Weekly, she played drums in high school
in an all-girl band called the Wildcats. And after her husband's acceptance
speech, Mrs. Gore, in a form-fitting blue dress, boogied with him to the
throbbing beat of Paul Simon and Fleetwood Mac.

She has begun to win over the music industry, which loathed her 1980's crusade
against what she called the sadism of Twisted Sister, Motley Crue and other rock
bands. She pressured them to voluntarily put labels on albums that contained
sexually explicit lyrics, though she opposed legislation to ban the sale of
raunchy records to minors. "She stayed faithful to her promise that she was
against censorship," said Danny Goldberg, senior vice president of Atlantic
Records.

Carter Eskew, a Gore family friend and a consultant to the Clinton campaign, was
sure to mention Mrs. Gore's collection of rock and jazz oldies. "She's not at
all uptight or judgmental," he said. "She's incredibly fun."

Fun.

In Presidential elections, the wives of candidates become a kind of Rorschach
test for the nation on what it means to be a woman. This year's role models
could not be more different: Mrs. Gore, Hillary Clinton, Barbara Bush, Marilyn
Quayle.

On the so-called baby boomers' ticket, Mrs. Gore and Mrs. Clinton symbolize for
many the two paths women of their generation have chosen and the struggle of
homemakers and women who work outside the home to come to terms with each other.
The strong public reaction to both women reflects society's ambivalence. Each
has been caricatured: Mrs. Clinton as the selfish, shrewish career woman, Mrs.
Gore as the prudish housewife.

The two are now trying hard to convince the public that they have a lot in
common: they are both mothers, feminists and advocates for children. But above
all, they are the wives of politicians.

Unlike Mrs. Clinton, Mrs. Gore sacrificed her personal ambitions to raise four
children.  As her husband's career rose, she gave up her dream of becoming a
child psychologist, quit her job as a newspaper photographer and cut short the
publicity tour for her book, "Raising PG Kids in an X-Rated Society."

Last week, Mrs. Gore was again in her role as political wife. She has been in it
for 16 years, and she is a pro.

Her press aide, Kiki Moore, brought in reporters for half-hour interviews with
her in a hotel room. Ms. Moore suggested that Mrs. Gore sit in a wingback chair
(better for photographs). Mrs. Gore perched herself at the edge of the chair,
poised and polished in her fuchsia suit, black pumps and blow-dried pageboy. She
seemed to gird herself
for the painful, intrusive and often silly questions she has to endure.

Asked why she never became a psychologist, Mrs. Gore was silent for a moment.
The look on her face was unreadable, almost blank. Finally, she said, "Because
that's what made sense to me."

"There are incremental decisions that one makes as one moves through one's
life," she said. "I still have young children. My youngest is 9. I'm certainly
doing a little bit more in terms of volunteer activity now. It's kind of an ebb
and flow. And I've been fortunate enough to be in the position where I don't
economically have to go and work full time, which I think many parents do."

The Democrats will portray Mrs. Clinton and Mrs. Gore as apotheoses of their
era. "What a powerful team!" said Nancy Hoit, a friend of the Gores. "They are
two women who truly represent the women of their generation, trying to balance
all the complicated demands of home and career and the causes they care about."
Republican strategists have made no secret of their desire to exploit the
differences between the women and, if possible, to set them against each other.
But Mrs. Gore and Mrs. Clinton have given them little opportunity. On the
convention podium, the women threw their arms around each other and hopped up
and down like pep squad leaders whose team had just won the game.

Earlier in the week, Mrs. Gore introduced Mrs. Clinton at a party of
Congressional wives as "a mother, a child advocate and a person of principle
whom I deeply admire." Mrs. Gore later said Mrs. Clinton had been "giving me
some great tips" on how to protect her children -- Karenna, 18 years old;
Kristin, 15; Sarah, 13, and Albert, 9 -- from the stresses of the campaign.
(Rule No. 1: Keep the children away from the press.) Mrs. Gore also had her hair
styled by Mrs. Clinton's hairdresser, Kristof, in a cut that is the image of
Mrs. Clinton's post-headband pageboy.

Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson was born on Aug. 19, 1948, in Washington. Her mother
nicknamed her Tipper when she was a baby. Family history has it that this
endearment came from a song her mother sang to her. Her parents were divorced
when she was 4, and she and her mother moved in with her grandparents in
Virginia. It was the 1950's, a sad and lonely time to be a girl from a broken
home -- an experience that she said has given her empathy for the suffering of
others.

She attended a girls' school in Washington. She later told a reporter, "I was
not raised to do anything except get married and have children." She met Al Gore
at his high school prom in suburban Washington, and they soon became
sweethearts. He took her home to Carthage, Tenn., to meet his father, Senator
Albert Gore, and his mother, Pauline Gore.

"She was dressed fit to kill," the elder Mr. Gore recalled recently. "She was a
lovely blonde, beautiful sparkling eyes, shapely and pleasant. I was even more
struck by her beauty the next morning. She came to breakfast with every eyelash
in place. She was dressed for an evening ball."

Al Jr. went to Harvard University. Tipper followed him to Boston a year later.
She graduated with a degree in psychology from Boston University in 1970. The
next month, they were married. She was 21.

When her husband was elected to Congress in 1976, Mrs. Gore gave up her job as a
newspaper photographer at The Tennessean in Nashville.

"I built a darkroom at my home in Virginia and freelanced in Washington," she
said. "I had a picture in The Washington Star. I had some pictures in The
Washington Post. One I remember was of the opening of 'Coal Miner's Daughter.'
There were others in trade journals. I found that it was better to work with
those types of publications because I could set my own schedule. I had young
children."

Chris Downey, wife of Representative Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of New York, met
Mrs. Gore a few years after the Gores moved to Washington. The women often jog
together.

"She's very funny," Mrs. Downey said. "All we do is giggle. When I need to talk
to her, she is absolutely there for me. She's a real good friend. She keeps her
counsel."

Mrs. Downey said her friend had taken on the primary burden of raising four
children. Her husband often goes to Tennessee on weekends and works late on
Capitol Hill. She maintains two houses in two worlds: Arlington, Va., and
Carthage, Tenn.

"You're sacrificing every day," Mrs. Downey said. "Giving up the book tour and
the photography is the least of what Tipper has given up over the years."

"Women like Tipper subsidize the women who work," Mrs. Downey said. "She
volunteers for the P.T.A. She improves the quality of children's education. I'm
indebted to women like Tipper. I wish I could stay home, but its financially
impossible. She's like all those women who could be getting paid money, but
choose to make their time available to their families and communities."

Mrs. Gore threw herself into volunteerism in the mid-1980's when her youngest
child was a toddler. Two of her causes grew out of conversations with her
daughters.

She was driving home with the children one afternoon after they had had lunch
with their father in the Senate dining room. They were just a couple of blocks
from the Capitol when her girls noticed an unkempt woman on the corner talking
to the air.

"Can we help her?" they asked. "Can we take her home with us?"

She and the children decided to volunteer at shelters. She went on to organize
Families for the Homeless, a group that raised money and tried to bring
attention to the issue.

Mrs. Gore tells the story of the homeless woman in almost every interview. "I am
very proud that I decided to do something about my feelings about homeless
people," she said. "Every homeless person has one problem. They don't have a
home. With a Clinton-Gore Administration, you're going to have a policy that's
going to address this."

At the time, her advocacy for the homeless went unnoticed, while her battle
against porn rock made Tipper Gore a household name.

One day, her daughter Karenna was listening to Prince's album "Purple Rain."
Mrs. Gore was shocked by the sexually explicit lyrics. She got together with
other women, including her friend Susan Baker, wife of James Baker, who was
Secretary of the Treasury at the time. Together they founded the Parents' Music
Resource Center.

They went on talk shows and wrote articles to publicize their outrage that
parents were not warned about lyrics that they believed glorified rape, suicide,
sadomasochism, incest and the occult.

And they used their access to power. The wives of six House members and 10
Senators wrote to the Recording Industry Association of America, proposing a
rating system that would tell consumers if records, tapes or videos contained
violent or sexually explicit lyrics. The alarmed president of the association
replied with alacrity. Within weeks, the association agreed to place warning
labels on albums.

"Because Susan Baker and I were involved, we were able to get doors opened,"
Mrs. Gore said at the time. Then the women won a hearing on the issue before a
Senate committee that Senator Gore served on. Mrs. Gore and Mrs. Baker testified
and answered questions from the committee.

"I see this as my thing, not my husband's," Mrs. Gore said afterward. "I don't
see this affecting my husband one way or another. I was an activist before I
married my husband. I protested the Vietnam War and I worked for civil rights.
This is not the wife of a Senator who has suddenly gone nuts."

But her actions were extraordinary for the wife of a Southern politician. She
had violated the rules of invisibility and seemliness. She was at the heart of a
controversy that many musicians took as an assault on rock-and-roll and freedom
of expression. It put Senator Gore, who was contemplating a Presidential bid, in
an uncomfortable position.

The issue played well in Tennessee, a Bible Belt state, but it turned off many
of the columnists who later wrote about the Senator's Presidential candidacy. It
also did not please some potential contributors.

Mrs. Gore was on her book tour when her husband decided to run for President in
1987. She cut the tour short and divided her time between the campaign trail and
her children. She and her husband met with leaders of the entertainment industry
in Los Angeles to discuss her campaign for record labeling. She tried to explain
that she was against censorship, but the group was not convinced.

Later, Mrs. Gore said she had told the executives that she felt she had
inadvertently encouraged advocates of censorship at the Senate hearing. Her
husband agreed, saying the hearing "was not a good idea."

Senator Gore dropped out of the race. And in the spring of 1989, disaster struck
the family. Senator Gore and his son, then 6, were at a baseball game in
Baltimore. In the parking lot, Albert pulled his hand out of his father's and
darted in front of a speeding car. The boy clung to life for weeks. The Gores
kept vigil at his bedside. The boy recovered.

Mrs. Gore neither delved into the horror or exploited it for sympathy. Instead,
she quickly moved from the personal to the safer ground of the political. "It
stopped everything in its tracks, just like an explosion," she said. "We were in
the hospital a month. Al never left his side, except a couple of times for
votes.

"The point that I'd like to make is that my husband was able to do that because
his employers were the people of Tennessee, who gave him family leave to be with
his injured child. A Clinton-Gore Administration is deeply and personally
committed to making sure that all Americans have the opportunity for family
leave."

For all the portrayals of Mrs. Gore as the loving mother, crusading advocate and
selfless volunteer, the image of her that sticks from her moment in the
convention limelight is of the politician's wife who is, after all, herself a
politician. As her aide signaled that the interview had to end, Mrs. Gore moved
near the window so a photographer could get a better shot. Move your hand, he
suggested.

And she did.

NAME: Tipper Gore

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: And then Tipper Gore danced: At the Democratic National
Convention in New York last week, Mrs. Gore worked to broaden her image. (pg.
1); With the Clintons, above, in Arkansas: Tipper Gore once introduced Hillary
Clinton as "a mother, a child advocate and a person of principle whom I deeply
admire." For many, the women symbolize the struggle of homemakers and working
women to come to terms with one another. (Lee Romero/The New York Times); The
Gores arriving in New York, right, for the Democratic National Convention. (Jim
Estrin/The New York Times); Mrs. Gore, below right, testified before a Senate
committee in 1989 in her bid to persuade record companies to label music that
has sexually explicit lyrics. (The Associated Press)(pg. 9)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Soviet Archives;
What Answers Lurk in the Billions of Secret Pages?

BYLINE: By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words


WERE there American P.O.W.'s in Soviet labor camps? Was Alger Hiss a spy? Did
Lenin have an affair with a beautiful French Socialist? Will the opening of the
Soviet archives really allow questions like these to be answered?

A thrill of anticipation is running through American Soviet scholars as roughly
250 million files in several archives of the former Soviet Union are opened, and
many of the researchers are spending their summer poring over the records.

The obstacles, of course, are enormous. Archivists are still framing policies on
restrictions -- documents from the last 30 years will be screened, and the
former K. G. B. is not planning to disclose secrets or name informers. The
volume of paper is huge, and largely uncatalogued and unmicrofilmed.

And some scholars are dubious of the whole hunt.

"What disturbs me is that a lot of people will flock to Moscow, look at
documents marked 'top secret' and assume they're reading the truth," said Robert
Conquest, senior research fellow of Stanford University's Hoover Institute.
"The top secret files relating to the 1937 census do not refer to the great
famine of 1932 at all. The 1939 census was a complete fake -- but the figures
are available, and have been researched."

Edward Keenan, a history professor at Harvard, was particularly skeptical about
records from the Stalin era. "These were mostly not lettered men -- not Lord
Chesterfields who'd sit down at the end of the day, take pen in hand and write
for an hour," he said. "These were street politicians, Mafioso. They did the
important stuff face-to-face.

"Such a large portion of the paper product was meant to deceive that it's just
not going to be like dealing with the records of any other modern state. The
Nazis never lied to themselves so much."

Professors Keenan and Conquest were among a group of Soviet experts asked by the
Week in Review what questions they would like to see pursued in the archives.
Their suggestions are below, arranged chronologically. Others who contributed
questions were: Richard Ericson, director of Columbia University's Harriman
Institute; Jerry F. Hough, professor of politics at Duke; Richard Pipes,
professor of history at Harvard; Michael Scammell, professor of Russian
literature at Cornell; Abby Smith, historian, Library of Congress; Mark H.
Teeter, deputy director of the Kennan Institute for Advanced Russian Studies and
Robert C. Tucker, emeritus professor of politics at Princeton.

Did the Germans finance Lenin between March and November 1917 to get Russia out
of World War I?

Did Lenin, as rumored, have an affair with Inessa Armand, a French Socialist? If
he did, it would show him to be more open to temptation and more of a romantic
than he ever admitted. Lenin refused for years to wed his companion, Nadezhda
Krupskaia, because he considered marriage a bourgeois institution.

Was Lenin's grandfather a Jewish convert to Orthodoxy? Soviet historians have
made much of the fact that many early Bolsheviks were Jewish, but noted
repeatedly that Lenin was not.

Did Stalin secretly order the 1934 murder of Sergei Kirov, the popular Leningrad
party leader whose assassination gave Stalin the excuse to claim anti-Soviet
plotters were everywhere and start the Great Purges of the 1930's? How many
million people actually died in the purges? What was the real population after
the purges and 1932 famine?

What was the joke that the poet Osip Mandelstam told that resulted in his death
in a labor camp?

Are there any hidden masterpieces in the archives of the K. G. B., which seized
the works of many arrested writers as evidence?

What did Stalin underline or write in the margins of the histories of the czars
he often read?

How early did Stalin put out feelers to Hitler before the 1939 non-agression
pact was signed? Did any event in the West influence that decision?

What considerations were behind the massacre of 4,000 Polish Army officers in
the Katyn woods in 1940, after Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland?

Did the Chinese Communists once offer to hand Manchuria over to the Soviets in
return for help against Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists?

How did Stalin die? It's been reported that after he suffered a stroke in his
dacha in 1953, his servants tried to get a doctor, but members of the Politburo
stalled them, saying Stalin was "just sleeping" even though he had been in a
coma for four hours. And how sane was Stalin during his last year?

How early did Castro go Communist? Was he a Soviet client from the beginning, or
did hostility from the United States force him to seek Soviet help?

What did Lee Harvey Oswald do while in the Soviet Union? Was there any Soviet
complicity in the killing of President Kennedy?

When the Berlin Wall was being built, what would have happened if NATO had
simply driven up bull dozers and knocked it down? What were the official
contingency plans?

Why did the big break with China occur? Was it really because China wanted
nuclear weapons to use if the Americans tried to stop them from invading the
island of Quemoy, as claimed?

How much money did the Soviets spend on the Vietnam War? As much as the United
States spent? Who was manning the Soviet missile batteries that shot down
Americans over North Vietnam?

Were Soviet soldiers firing Egypt's batteries in the 1973 war? And were rumors
that Israelis destroyed a Soviet squadron on the ground true?

Did the Soviets build so many missiles in the 1970's because they had abandoned
the concept of mutually assured destruction and decided to launch a first strike
if war threatened?

Was the "yellow rain" poured on the Hmong people in Laos really Soviet chemical
weapons, as the C.I.A. said, or bee feces, as American scientists said?

How much help did the Soviets give to terrorism by the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the Irish Republican Army, the Japanese Red Army Faction or other
groups?

In 1981, Poland's leader, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, claimed he had to declare
martial law because the Soviets were about to march in. Was that true?

Did Brezhnev order Afghanistan invaded without a discussion by the full
Politburo? What factors turned the tide of war?

In 1983, the Soviets said they believed the United States was preparing a
preemptive strike. Ultimately, President Reagan made a conciliatory speech. Did
Soviet officials really expect an attack or were they trying to force Mr. Reagan
to soften his "Evil Empire" speeches about the Soviet Union?

Did the K. G. B. order Bulgaria's secret police to arrange the assassination of
Pope John Paul II?

What do the tapes of the conversations among commanders of the jet fighters who
shot down Korean Air Lines Flight 007 show?

Just how did Matthias Rust fly through Soviet air defenses to land in Red Square
in 1987?

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Inessa Armand; Sergei Kirov (Tass/Sovfoto); Lenin in Gorky in
1922. The photo of Stalin was superimposed later. (Sipa); Corpses of Polish
officers in the Katyn woods. (Sygma); Soviet soldier in Afghanistan in 1988.
(Patrick Robert/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gangs Abiding By Cease-Fire In Los Angeles

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 18


To the astonishment of the police, a cease-fire among the black gangs of Los
Angeles appears to be holding, nearly three months after it began at the time of
the riots.

Rival Crips and Bloods have been partying together and calling each other "cuz."
And although some drive-by shootings have recently been reported, nervous
residents say there is a new quality to nights in the inner city, with fewer
sounds of gunfire and police sirens.

Last year 771 people were killed in Los Angeles County in confrontations among
gangs of all races. But in the months since the rioting, black-on-black gang
violence has fallen sharply.

'A Man-to-Man Thing'

Detective Bob Jackson, a gang expert at the Los Angeles Police Department, says
four people died in fighting between black gangs in May and June, down from 22
in the same period last year. In areas outside the City of Los Angeles patrolled
by the County Sheriff's Department, there was one black-on-black killing in the
two-month period, compared with seven in the same period last year.

"The gang truce is real," said Lamont Williams, a member of the Grape Street
Watts gang as he lounged in the sun this week near the pale purple buildings of
the Jordan Downs housing project. "We're always going to have conflicts, but
they aren't escalating now. It's just a man-to-man thing now, not a gang thing."

But the police and some gang members warn that the truce is fragile, given the
disorganized nature of the gangs and the continuing atmosphere of frustration
and violence in the inner city.

"Time will tell whether or not we are dealing with a real situation where they
definitely want to return to society," Detective Jackson said.

Greg Davis, a longtime gang member who goes by the street name Batman, said:
"It's going to be hard to bring it all to an end. A lot of us been doing this
for years and don't want it to stop. We're killing each other off, and a lot of
us don't really care. A lot of these brothers thrill on this violence.

"It's hard to trust somebody you've been shooting at and killing for years," he
said.

The signs of a truce are all the more extraordinary because there is no
centralized structure or leadership among the county's 100,000 gang members. The
"war" that has escalated among the black gangs over the past decade has involved
hundreds of street rivalries among many gangs rather than any larger
confrontation between those members calling themselves Crips or Bloods.

Hispanic and Asian gangs are still at war among themselves, and the police say
black gang members are continuing with robberies, assaults and drug dealing.

"To be quite honest with you, we just don't know why black gangs are not killing
each other," said Sgt. Wes McBride, a gang expert with the sheriff's department,
noting that cease-fire efforts in the past have broken down almost immediately.
"There's no precedent for us to look at. This has never happened before."

He suggested that the city's black gangs might be evolving in some unpredictable
way, just as the Crips and Bloods came into being in the years after the Watts
riot in 1965.

Fun Has Gone From Battle

Mr. Davis, one of the last surviving founders of the Crips in 1969, said that he
had taken part in brief truces in the past and that the difference now is that
the killing had risen to unbearable levels.

"It used to be fun," said Mr. Davis, who is 37 years old. "All you're going to
get is beat up, swole up. Tomorrow you'll do better. Now everyone's got guns.
It's a one-way trip to death. Either he gets you or you get him."

Even before the recent rioting, which began April 29, talk of a cease-fire was
spreading among gang members appalled at the fratricidal killings among black
men. The riot, with its crescendo of violence, followed by aggressive law
enforcement, appears to have given the cease-fire a push, said Mike Genelin, the
gang expert for the District Attorney's office.

"What that process did was buy time for this kind of event to be more successful
than it might have been," he said. "I'm surprised and very pleased that it
appears to be holding."

Stepping Out of Shadows

The truce has allowed some of the young men to gain a sense of identity and
purpose through peacemaking and hopes of inclusion in the work force rather than
through violence. Some gang members have appeared on television talk shows, and
others are eager to step forward in public to express their grievances now that
people seem to be paying attention.

But the police and many gang members voice doubts that a truce can last if the
social causes of the violence are not addressed. Some local ministers and social
agencies have begun to complain of a failure by government and business leaders
to seize this opportunity to offer jobs and programs that would tempt young men
from the gangs.

"There's a stew pot out there that just cooks these gangs, and they come out of
that," Sergeant McBride said, adding that unemployment, drugs and the lack of
opportunity contribute to the anger of the young men.

Describing the impulse to violence, Mike Evans, a former gang member, said: "It
was like a fire was in me as far as doing destruction. With a lot of the young
guys now, the fire is in them, too."

This fire was evident among the groups of young men pacing aimlessly one recent
afternoon in the hot sun of the Jordan Downs project.

"They call me Booboo," said one of the men, Robert Lewis. "I've been living here
since I was 3 years old. I'm 28 now. I haven't benefited from nothing that
society gave me, except how to survive and how to die. How can you expect young
men like us to function in society?"

As other men lounging nearby yelled encouragement, he continued: "From the time
we come out of our mama's womb we are lacking everything. We are lacking
education. We are lacking opportunities. The gang thing is something we know.
It's the only thing we know, because we don't know how to work."

Loyalty to Their Projects

His friend, Mr. Williams of the Grape Street Watts, said that the projects offer
the young men one thing, a sense of community, and that through their gang
affiliations the men return that loyalty.

"We represent where we live at: Grape Street," Mr. Williams said. "I would die
for Grape Street."

At the home of Mr. Davis, the old-time Crip, is an engraved plaque with the
names of 21 fellow gang members who have given their lives for their
neighborhoods. "All your love ones rest in peace," it reads.

Some day, he said, his dream is to erect a sort of Vietnam wall memorial with
the names of all the Crips and Bloods who have died in action, "and nobody
should come up there and scratch out anybody's name."

Like the young men who died in Vietnam, Mr. Davis said: "They died for a cause.
They died for their colors. They died for something they believed in, and that
was Crip."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. IS SURE PHOTO OF MISSING IS FAKE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


A year after the release here of a puzzling photograph from Cambodia purporting
to show three Vietnam-era American servicemen still in captivity in Indochina,
Defense Department officials say they are convinced that it was in fact a
reproduction of a 1923 photo of three Soviet farmers published in the December
1989 Khmer-language issue of a magazine called Soviet Union.

A copy of the magazine arrived at the Pentagon on Monday from the Cambodian
capital, Phnom Penh, where it was found in the National Library. It was released
by the Pentagon on Tuesday after being shown to relatives of the three men.
Family members were convinced last year that the photograph was real.

Until July 1, when the Defense Department received a fax of the 1989 magazine
photograph, officials said they believed that the picture circulated last year
was fraudulent but had found no evidence. When the photo was made public last
July by Eugene (Red) McDaniel, a former prisoner of war and director of the
American Defense Institute in Arlington, Va., the three men were identified as
Col. John L. Robertson and Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. of the Air Force, and Lieut.
Larry James Stevens of the Navy.

'Raises More Questions'

Kathy Lundy, the daughter-in-law of Major Lundy, said on Friday that the
families were skeptical of the Pentagon's conclusions and believed that the
picture found in Cambodia only "raises more questions." She said that quick
research done on their behalf by contacts in Moscow found that Soviet Union
magazine was published in 22 languages, but not Khmer.

Russian and English editions from December 1989 do not show the picture that was
reported to have come from the Cambodian library, Mrs. Lundy said. The Pentagon
acknowledges that that is true, and explains the discrepancy by saying that not
all regional editions of the magazine were identical.

Mrs. Lundy said that while the families would ask in a news conference here next
week for more research into the origins of the magazine, they are prepared to be
persuaded.

"If this is truly the source, we'll accept it," she said.

The photograph from Soviet Union is not identical to the one circulated last
year, the Pentagon spokesman, Pete Williams, said when he showed the fax to
reporters on July 2. The picture of three men, thought to have been taken in
1923, had been doctored to add mustaches. A banner praising collective farming
was altered to include a message indicating captivity. But the setting's
similarities were apparent.

Mr. Williams also told reporters that the picture was one of six that now appear
to have come from Soviet magazines. The other five were found to be images of
Latvians, various Soviet workers and a Soviet general doctored to look American.
Only one picture eluded identification by the Defense Intelligence Agency until
now.

"D.I.A. is satisfied now that we have found the source of the
'Robertson-Stevens-Lundy' picture," he said.

Soviet magazines would have been among the few publications with Caucasian or
Western faces found in the three Communist Indochinese countries of Cambodia,
Laos and Vietnam. In a refugee camp for Indochinese in Thailand, where the
picture of the three men described as missing Americans first surfaced, it was a
common practice for Vietnamese and Cambodian residents to try to barter
information, pictures, bones or dogtags (also often faked) for money or
settlement in the United States.

In an interview on Monday, Mr. McDaniel said: "We can't confirm or deny that the
picture is real, but we have three families who say that the men are their loved
ones. The Pentagon has tried to discredit every picture that has come in."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Defense Department officials say that a photograph, right, made
public last July and said to be showing three Vietnam-era American servicemen
still in captivity in Indochina, was a doctored reproduction of a 1923 photo,
above, of three Soviet farmers that was published in the December 1989
Khmer-language issue of a magazine called Soviet Union.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Shying From Bosnian Conflict

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 17


As efforts to stop the Serbian shelling of Sarajevo continue, the pleas of
Bosnians for Western military intervention to rescue their besieged capital and
dismembered country have fallen on wary ears in the Bush Administration.

President Bush has ruled out sending American ground troops to help end the
fighting, but Washington has said it is prepared to lend air and naval support
to enforce the embargo against Yugoslavia and safeguard the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Sarajevo.

Senior Administration officials say those two contingencies are among a range of
United States military options, including air strikes against Serbian targets,
depending on the effects of the cease-fire that the parties to the Bosnia
fighting, meeting in London, agreed to observe beginning Sunday evening. But
senior Pentagon officials strongly oppose increased American involvement and
there are no imminent plans to intervene militarily.

A Quandary for the U.S.

Bush Administration officials say the crisis in Bosnia poses a difficult
quandary for the United States and represents an unwinnable situation for the
military.

If Washington does not do more, "the worry is the carnage and the bloodletting
goes on and it demonstrates the impotence of the great powers," a senior
Administration official said. The alternative is "getting involved in a
situation that is in many respects similar to Northern Ireland, and not being
able to solve it by military means," the official said.

"If you put enough force in there" you might deal with the fighting, but not
with the fundamental religious and ethnic problems that transform the conflict
into a guerrilla war, the official said.

Assuming the Administration does not reverse its policy on sending combat ground
troops, the options open to the Pentagon include flying air cover for land
convoys and supply planes and air strikes against Serbian positions.

Administration Reluctant

Locked in what appears will be a close Presidential race, the Bush
Administration appears reluctant to increase American military involvement in
Bosnia. But Washington has said that if fighting closes Sarajevo's airfield to
the international relief effort now flying in food, medicine and supplies it
will contribute aircraft to safeguard the shipments.

A fine line, however, divides two situations: flying protective escort and being
drawn into larger air attacks to push Serbian fighters back. Air Force F-16
fighter jets now conducting exercises at Aviano Air Base in northern Italy could
attack Serbian mortar and artillery positions in the hills surrounding Sarajevo,
but military officials fear this strategy could backfire.

"Air strikes would just make them dig in their heels, fight and inflict greater
casualties on Sarajevo," a Pentagon official said. "The Serbs are a hardheaded
people who historically have been prepared to take heavy casualties."

A British official familiar with the American military thinking agreed, saying,
"A few large explosions would kill a few of them, but you can't intimidate them
into stopping by roaring overhead and dropping a few missiles."

Some State Department officials disagree with the Pentagon's analysis, arguing
that the Serbs respect military might and that bombing would chase their forces
out of the hills.

A Need for Artillery

Air strikes, however, would not achieve much without ground forces to secure the
airfield and establish a cordon of 15 to 20 miles around it to protect against
Serbian mortar and artillery fire. These forces would have to be equipped with
their own artillery to counterattack if necessary.

Officially, the United States has ruled out sending combat ground forces,
although planners at the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington have drafted
scenarios where Marines and the Army's 82d Airborne Division could be sent to
Bosnia. Officials say as many as 50,000 troops would be needed, assuming the
forces encountered strong resistance from the Serbs.

Pentagon officials say that attacking the 60,000 to 70,000 Serbian regular and
irregular troops in the Sarajevo area would toughen the Serbs' resolve and drag
American forces into a civil war fed by ethnic animosities that are generations
old.

"For us to go in there on the ground would give the existing Government a new
rallying point, that outside invaders are besmirching Serbian territory," an
Army official said. "We would just become a set of clay pigeons in everyone's
shooting gallery."

American ground troops "could be a special target and complicate the situation
rather than solve it," Brent Scowcroft, Mr. Bush's national security adviser,
said on CNN on July 10.

History's Warning

Military officials say that the tragic images emerging from war-weary Sarajevo
coupled with the United States success in the Persian Gulf war has raised
unrealistic public expectations that the American military should be capable of
quickly ending the fighting in Bosnia.

"People have been mesmerized by Desert Storm," a senior Army official said. "But
the Yugoslav military and terrain is totally different. It's far more akin to
the kind of fighting that's gone on in Northern Ireland, Lebanon and Vietnam."

History also provides a stern warning. In World War II, Yugoslav partisan
forces, including Serbs, tied up 20 Axis divisions in the Yugoslav mountains,
even after the Nazis ordered that 100 Yugoslavs be executed for every German
soldier killed, military historians said.

State Department and Pentagon officials say that diplomatic efforts under way to
negotiate a settlement and the economic embargo of Yugoslavia are the best hopes
for a peaceful solution. An eight-nation naval force has sailed into the
Adriatic to monitor the embargo.

"From a humanitarian standpoint it's sad," a senior American general said. "But
just because it's sad doesn't mean we can solve it."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Abortion Foes See Tactics Backfire in New York

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1580 words


One year after sustained and sometimes violent abortion protests froze the city
of Wichita, Kan., in a 46-day showdown that ended with more than 2,600 arrests,
the militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue came to New York City last
week hoping for a prime showcase. They left barely a mark.

The group's failure to attract spontaneous support in a city with thousands of
abortion opponents and a large Roman Catholic community that has shown itself
willing to take to the streets indicated surprisingly little support for
Operation Rescue's militancy.

The use of a fetus during a confrontation with Gov. Bill Clinton may have
alienated some potential supporters who saw it as a cynical maneuver. But
Randall Terry, the group's founder, defended the tactic, saying it was necessary
to underscore the brutality of abortion itself.

Coming on the heels of its defeat in Buffalo last May, the group's showing in
New York revealed splits in its ranks and perhaps the end of its ability to
shape the national debate over the divisive abortion issue.

"I think Operation Rescue was a sort of Big Brother who knew how these things
should be run," said James R. Kelly, a professor of the sociology of religion at
Fordham University and an abortion opponent. "Now, I think they've lost that.
They have shown themselves not to be effective in the usual political sense."

Leaders of the group apparently saw the prospects for a defeat in New York. Last
month they downgraded their plans to attack clinics in New York, despite
announcements two months ago of major anti-abortion protests as a backdrop to
the Democratic National Convention.

By yesterday morning anti-abortion protests outside clinics had returned to
standard weekly events. And Operation Rescue leaders faced a landscape littered
with fines and a future holding the prospect of imprisonment of the group's
founder for violating a preliminary injunction. .

More damaging to the group than their legal problems, however, could be the
criticism of many abortion opponents who agree with Operation Rescue's goal of
criminalizing abortion but object to its illegal and occasionally grotesque
tactics.

Last week saw the group move to more extreme tactics. Unable to tap into
sympathetic sentiment and faced by hundreds of strident opponents, Operation
Rescue's leaders turned to a bizarre gambit, that of confronting Governor
Clinton with the preserved remains of a 19-week-old fetus. That confrontation
took place early Tuesday, when an Operation Rescue member, Harley D. Belew, on
the pretext of seeking an autograph, shoved a plastic salad-bar box containing a
fetal corpse into the candidate's path, violating a preliminary injunction
barring precisely such an attempt.

The violation of the law and the crude nature of the act outraged many in the
anti-abortion movement.

Daniel Berrigan, the radical priest who won nationwide attention during the
Vietnam War and has since focused on fighting abortion and the nuclear industry,
said he was alienated by the use of the fetus and believed it hurt the
anti-abortion movement as a whole. The group used a similar tactic last May in
Buffalo.

"It seems to me that they have shown a great deal of irreverence for a purported
human life," he said. "Their whole point is just to appall good people, and that
speaks for itself."

Little Support

Also evident was the group's failure to ignite spontaneous support in a city in
which John Cardinal O'Connor was able to gather 2,500 anti-abortion protesters
last month to hold a prayer vigil at the Eastern Women's Clinic on East 30th
Street.

By contrast, Operation Rescue protesters never numbered more than 100 and
quickly dwindled to splinter groups of 20 to 60. Mr. Terry, Operation Rescue's
founder, said he was disappointed by the lack of support in New York and by the
"apathy" and the "love of peace and avoidance of controversy" embraced by
religious leaders. "The churches in New York City," he said, "have grown
calloused to the barbarism that surrounds them."

By the week's end, only a handful of protesters showed up to be shouted down by
hundreds of well-organized and angry abortion-rights supporters.

Organized Opposition

It was, in part, the near-military organization of the abortion-rights
supporters that caused the group to veer away from its usual mad dash at the
clinic gates. It also reflected differences between Keith Tucci, executive
director of Operation Rescue, and Mr. Terry. Suspecting that the group's
approach would not work well in New York and aware of the close coordination of
abortion-rights advocates, Mr. Tucci last month all but abandoned plans for an
assault during the convention and instead decided to send mobile shock troops to
charge clinic gates in Baton Rouge, La., not Manhattan.

Mr. Terry, meanwhile, was determined to push ahead in New York and decided to
focus on small-scale protests at the clinics and a confrontation with the
Democratic nominee. He was clearly angered by Mr. Tucci's shift to Baton Rouge.

"The result is now I get to eat humble pie," said Mr. Terry.

Instead Mr. Terry and other leaders decided to "make Bill Clinton come face to
face with a victim of choice," said Mr. Terry.

The Rev. Robert Schenk, a pastor in the Buffalo area who has risen to the top of
the group's ranks, said the decision to switch tactics was made in June. During
an interview with Mr. Terry at the Inter-Continental Hotel, he said the decision
to reduce the scale of the confrontation was made "when we all sat around and
determined that numbers were not going to be our strength."

Numbers were the strength of the abortion-rights supporters, however, who had
prepared for the threatened confrontation for six weeks. A coalition of groups
organized by the Feminist Majority into the New York Clinic Defense Task Force
trained more than 5,000 men and women in techniques intended to keep abortion
protesters from interfering with clinics.

Using a plan developed in Los Angeles in 1989, the group dispatched teams of
abortion-rights supporters to 12 clinics in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the
Bronx and provided support to other sympathetic groups in Long Island, New
Jersey and elsewhere in New York.

During convention week, the group coordinated as many as 3,000 people on a
single day to stand with linked arms in front of clinics. They were prepared to
counter typical Operation Rescue assaults, such as blocking doorways, rushing
patients and locking members inside clinic areas. For the most part, the attacks
never came. When they did, they were controlled by police or driven away by
abortion-rights supporters.

"Two weeks ago we met with 20 priests and pastors from the area," Mr. Terry
said, "and most of them came out with us on Saturday to protest at the clinics.
But they couldn't even get in. They were shouted down and chased off at the end
of the street."

Coordination of the hundreds of abortion-rights supporters was left to a command
center that directed their own group's deployments and monitored movements by
Operation Rescue protesters over a network of 72 walkie-talkies, 21 cellular
telephones and 9 paging systems.

Using the same plan that worked so effectively in Buffalo last May, the Clinic
Defense Task Force instructed volunteers to start gathering outside the most
vulnerable clinics before dawn. Supporters, who ranged from radical activists
with the Women's Health Action and Mobilization (WHAM) to men like Joseph
Covino, a 67-year-old who described himself as a "guy with a wife and a couple
of kids who used to run a library and youth center," were then grouped and
organized by a hierarchy of leadership established in advance.

Though the confrontions outside the clinics were nonviolent, a handful of
abortion rights supporters went out of their way to provoke priests. Others
simply stood quietly, guarding the clinic doors.

Mr. Covino, who arrived at the clinics each day before dawn, said he became
involved because he supports a woman's right to choose an abortion if necessary,
and believes that Operation Rescue leaders are working on a broader social
agenda than they admit. "What was a deciding point for me," he said, "was that
the group is also anti-gun control, anti-birth control and against children's
services."

That complaint forms a common thread between abortion supporters and opponents
who seem to be rejecting Operation Rescue's militancy. "I would agree with the
goal of Operation Rescue," said Sidney Callahan, a Roman Catholic who is a
member of JustLife, an anti-abortion group. "But Randall Terry often adopts a
kind of military, aggressive stance that can seem directed more against women
than toward the protection of the unborn."

Ms. Callahan, like Mr. Covino, said she objects to the group's harassment of
patients at clinic sites and a broader philosophy that she perceives as
reactionary. "We are very committed to peace and feminist concerns," she said of
her group. "But it looks to me that Operation Rescue believes women should just
stay home and have children."

David Toolan, a Roman Catholic priest who writes for the Jesuit magazine
America, said he believes most people have simply wearied of Operation Rescue's
stridency and language and are seeking more reasonable discourse. "Very few
people are into that kind of strong civil disobedience," he said. "There is a
lot of disagreement about the strategy. A lot of people are just turned off."

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After its defeat in Buffalo last May, Operation Rescue's showing
in New York suggested that the group may no longer be able to shape the national
debate over abortion. Anti-abortion protesters prayed last week outside the
Inter-Continental Hotel. (Steve Berman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Time to End Embargo Against Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 389 words


To the Editor:

The concern expressed in a full-page advertisement July 10 for Do Ngoc Long, a
Vietnamese economist, and Doan Than Liem, a Vietnamese lawyer, arrested for
contact with an American businessman, is well taken. There appears no legal
justification under widely accepted international standards for their lengthy
detention and Mr. Liem's conviction.

However, we believe equal concern should be expressed for the denial of the
human right of the whole of Vietnam's population to develop their country's
economy because of the unilateral United States trade embargo and veto of
assistance from international financial institutions.

American nongovernmental organizations with aid programs in Vietnam, as well as
leaders of European and neighboring governments, have criticized this vestige of
past United States conflict with Vietnam. They observe its impact: the
impoverishment of innocent people and the making of refugees.

The two forms of denial of human rights are not unrelated. From Vietnamese press
accounts, it is clear that the underlying accusation against Mr. Long and Mr.
Liem is that they were engaged in subversive activity in league with Americans
whose motives were suspect. The perpetuation of the embargo and the position of
the United States in withholding diplomatic recognition heightens the suspicion
of some Vietnamese leaders and security officials, especially those influenced
by China's paranoia about foreigninspired "peaceful evolutionists."

It is easy to call such suspicions irrational, but our own business and
diplomatic interests are hobbled by an obsession that American prisoners of war
remain alive in Indochina.

"It is time," the ad says, "for all of us to realize our dream that the war be
truly ended," looking forward to a day when "suspicion and misunderstanding
become a thing of the past." The admonition applies to both countries. The
Vietnamese should release Mr. Long, Mr. Liem, Nguyen Dan Que and others whose
alleged crimes are essentially political. And President Bush should not reimpose
the trade embargo upon its expiration in September.

JOHN MC AULIFF
MARY BYRNE MCDONNELL
New York, July 10, 1992

The writers are, respectively, executive director, U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation
Project, and a Social Science Research Council program director.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Pusuing Art and Angst At Bob's Movie Camp

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2410 words

DATELINE: SUNDANCE, Utah


A Ute Indian banged a drum and chanted, offering prayers to cleanse the earth
and connect the newcomers with the spirit of this place, an isolated spot
blessed by the beauty of the Rocky Mountains. She burned sage and, with an eagle
feather, smeared it on the faces of those standing in a circle on the grass.
That came as a shock to some. "Fifty percent were New Yorkers dressed in black,"
said Greg Mottola, a New Yorker who wore black for much of his month at the
Sundance Institute's annual workshop for emerging film makers.

A few days later, the workshop's newsletter announced that River, the
part-Indian woman who had coordinated this opening ceremony, was available for
"acupuncture, bodywork or shamanic counseling." You could pick up her brochure
from Shirley in the administration office.

Sincere, artistic and not quite able to leave business behind -- the purifying
ceremony was the perfect rite of passage into what the Sundance Institute calls
its June Film Makers Lab.

The institute is a nonprofit organization founded 11 years ago by Robert Redford
(or Bob, as his familiars refer to him here, as in, "Why don't you borrow Bob's
horses?").  It is best known for the Sundance Film Festival, held each January
in Park City, Utah. But there is another Sundance, a prestigious summer camp for
movie makers.

Every year, a dozen or so directors and screenwriters hoping to make their first
features are chosen (from around 1,000 applicants) to spend June making movies
in the mountains, developing their works-in-progress under the guidance of
professional film makers. "El Norte," "A Dry White Season" and a raft of
lesser-known films came to life at Sundance. It is a beautifully simple plan,
designed to encourage films that don't fit the Hollywood mold. But Sundance is
not a simple place.

Among this year's film makers were: Todd Graff, an actor and writer who might
direct Madonna's next movie; Jamal Joseph, a former Black Panther who formed a
theater group while in Leavenworth prison; Robert Manganelli, whose project is
an artistic thriller starring his wife, Terrylene Sacchetti, an actress who is
deaf and who signs most of her dialogue. This movie camp is fun and fruitful, it
is pure at heart, but carefree it is not.

At Sundance, a resort situated in a canyon near Provo, Utah, the ambiance is
formed by a crazy collision between the natural, the well meaning and the
tasteless. A creek flows through the grounds and at one point forms a pond
guarded by a statue of an Indian in full headdress. Unfortunately, he is holding
a knife in a conspicuous phallic position, which accounts for his nickname,
Chief -- well, it's unprintable. The buildings are nouveau Southwestern chic,
all unvarnished wood and open beams, but touches like the General Store make the
place resemble Frontierland.

This theme-park atmosphere works, though, because the Sundance lab is an
otherworldly escape from Hollywood. Intensely ambitious people come here to
cleanse away the whiff of commercialism and competition. In other words, it's
not real life.

Hollywood successes like Sydney Pollack, Paul Mazursky and Sam Waterston,
officially called creative advisers, sit at communal picnic tables with the
lab's film makers, discussing their Sundance projects. The advisers look over
the younger directors' shoulders as they shoot scenes on video, then edit them
in a cabin in the woods where squirrels race around outside the open door.

The days are filled with a sense of missionary zeal about art. Evenings begin
with script readings or screenings of one of the advisers' movies. Then the
wound-up workshop members let off steam at late-night parties, drinking and
playing games in somebody's cabin. For a month they work and play
movies-in-the-mountains.

A reporter who enters this self-enclosed community is treated with unfailing
politeness but is clearly regarded a little like the devil: What is she doing
trespassing in Eden? But then, isn't publicity tempting?

In the endless Sundance battle between artistic purity and Hollywood truths,
everyone fights crassness -- idealism is one of Sundance's most endearing traits
-- and the Hollywood experts fight it most of all.

This year's advisers, each at Sundance for about a week, included several
workshop veterans: Randa Haines, the director of "Children of a Lesser God" and
"The Doctor"; Amy Robinson, the producer of "After Hours"; L. M. Kit Carson, a
co-writer of "Paris, Texas," and Frank Pierson, the writer of "Cool Hand Luke"
and director of "Citizen Cohn," a forthcoming HBO movie about Roy Cohn.

As Robert Redford explained the lab's purpose recently, "We want to come into
the lives of film makers at a stage where we can really help them, so that their
films are more likely to get made and will be better." Here are three stories
from this year's lab. Each in its own way is pure Sundance.

To Madonna Or Not to Madonna?

Todd Graff is absolutely writing the script for "Angie, I Says," based on Avra
Wing's novel about a big-haired, long-nailed New Jersey girl. Madonna is
committed to star in it. Twentieth-Century Fox is definitely making this movie,
and they have told Todd Graff he can direct it if he wants, though he has never
done such a thing before. To direct or not to direct? That is the question he
carried to Sundance.

In Hollywood terms, he is so hot that Entertainment Weekly recently named him
one of their coolest people of the summer. At Sundance he is what they call "a
transitional artist."

At the age of 32, he has acted in films like "Dominick and Eugene" and been more
successful as a writer. Shirley MacLaine and Marcello Mastroianni are the stars
of "Used People," a forthcoming movie based on his original script, and his
adaptation of the Dutch thriller "The Vanishing" is now being filmed with Jeff
Bridges and Kiefer Sutherland. But can he direct?

He creates an easy, jokey atmosphere on his set in the Sundance rehearsal hall,
a building like a barn that doubles as a stage for filming. Set is probably too
grand a word for a couple of makeshift walls and a bed, but that's what it's
supposed to be.

Each year Sundance brings in professional technicians and actors to work on
scenes, but Madonna is not one of them. For the moment Angie is being played by
an actress named Nadia Dajani. She and the director have a casual rapport, and
he doesn't even get annoyed when he has to delay calling "Action" until someone
on the set of the Black Panther movie next door stops yelling "O.K., brother!"

Yet, easygoing as he seems, there is a Woody Allen-ish quality to his
directorial approach. Every now and then, he stops to beat up on himself.

Randa Haines watches him shoot and suggests, very gently and tentatively, that
he might consider a different camera move.

Todd Graff throws up his hands, shakes his head and says, "You're right, that's
better, but I don't think that way!"

Randa Haines puts an arm around his shoulder and says sweetly, "You're so hard
on yourself! Stop it!"

This happens on the set; it happens in the editing room. Sundance prides itself
on being a place where it's safe to fail, and Todd Graff is taking this to
heart.

One day he decides to shoot a scene from a script he didn't write, to see if it
would free him up as a director. The creative advisers, who meet every morning
to discuss the film makers' progress, are ecstatic. "He thought of that
himself?" they say, with pride and wonder, as if he were a child who had just
taken his first steps. It's sort of cute, the way they protect this hot
Hollywood property. And, with all his high-powered connections, he may be the
kind of director who needs Sundance most of all. Better to face his worst fears
here instead of on a real set with millions of dollars and Madonna's career --
not to mention his own -- on the line.

He has promised the advisers not to make a snap decision about directing. First,
he has to write "Angie, I Says," and Madonna will just have to wait to find out
if he is going to direct her movie. This is a very Sundance way to be.

A Black Panther Comes of Age

While some of the workshop's film makers are scared and insecure, Jamal Joseph
says that putting his work on the line at Sundance is nothing next to staging a
play in Leavenworth. There, he said, "you can really die because of a bad
review."

One hot afternoon, he and his actors -- including Khalil Kain, one of the stars
of the movie "Juice," and Rocky Carroll, featured in "The Piano Lesson" on
Broadway and the television series "Roc" -- sit in a circle in the rehearsal
hall. The 39-year-old director takes them through a single scene from his
autobiographical script, "Liberated Territory: A Rite of Passage," about a group
of adolescent friends who become Black Panthers. Each time he asks for a
different emotion: anger, love, paranoia, humor.

Now and then, tourists with cameras slung around their necks poke their heads
through the black curtains that block the doorway and hear the angry, loving or
paranoid versions of these lines: "We have been letting the pigs dictate the
time and place of our confrontation!" and "You've been spending too much time
with your white friends." Who knows what the tourists thought?

One of the lab's sacred tenets is that it has no stars, but if there were a star
he would be this Black Panther for the 90's, a man with a revolutionary past and
a tale of survival ready-made for the movies.

Sitting under the trees at Sundance, Jamal Joseph tells his life story
cheerfully and with supreme self-confidence. He is wearing an "X" cap and a
T-shirt that says "City Kids," the name of a group of New York teen-agers with
whom he has just made a rap video, "What You Gonna Do About Hate?"

His parents were Cuban, but his foster parents, who raised him in Harlem, were
the children of slaves. At 15, he joined the Black Panther Party, and for the
next 15 years was in and out of prison on charges related to his Panther
activism.

Only when he landed in Leavenworth (convicted of hiding someone on the run from
the F.B.I.) did he identify his periods of drug abuse, drinking and suicidal
thoughts as post-traumatic stress syndrome -- a condition many Vietnam veterans
suffered from. Now cleaned up, he teaches communications at Touro College in
East Harlem. And he is trying to raise money to produce his film with some
partners, he said, because he knows what they'd do to it in Hollywood. "They'd
want to turn it into 'Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Panthers.' "

"Liberated Territory" is the kind of project Sundance can't resist. Like its
director, it's commercially viable and has a social conscience.

How to Sell A Tasteful Thriller

Three Hollywood agents made a point of telling Robert Manganelli that they threw
his script, "Seeing in the Dark," in the trash. And he turned down three other
agents who didn't seem right for his project -- the story of a deaf woman who is
clairvoyant, a photographer with whom she falls in love and a murder that
envelops them both.

The Sundance advisers think the 31-year-old director really has something. "He
has something!" Hume Cronyn said out loud at a screening of one scene that
Robert Manganelli shot at Sundance, even though the filming conditions were
relatively primitive. The story takes place in industrial Bridgeport, Conn., but
there are woods and rustic cabins everywhere on screen. "I get a kick out of the
'Twin Peaks' look that we can't avoid, being up here," the director said.

On film, his style is visual and energetic, his sense of mystery pronounced, but
on paper, a summary of "Seeing in the Dark" makes it sound dangerously like a
politically correct do-gooder movie.

This is where some of the Sundance advisers can give practical help. The
producer Amy Robinson and Robert Manganelli had the following exchange during a
Sundance tete-a-tete.

She said, "Here we are at Sundance and this is art, but you want to go back home
to Santa Monica and make your movie, and what you've got is a thriller."

He said, "Yes, it's a tasteful thriller."

She said, "Don't use the word tasteful."

It's not the typical Sundance lesson, but it's a valuable one.

Even so, the film maker, who was a still photographer before going to graduate
film school at U.C.L.A., is relieved to be away from commercial pressures. "Here
they've said my script is worth something," he said. "The judgmental thing is
gone. The idea is: It's not good, it's not bad; it's a script, and how can we
help to get it better?"

One way is to figure out how to handle the issue of Terrylene Sacchetti's
dialogue. The director originally intended to use subtitles under her sign
language. But some advisers wanted no subtitles, while others suggested giving
the character a spiritual inner voice. The director now thinks he'll try to
minimize the subtitles. It's a classic Sundance strategy. No one gave him a way
to solve the problem; they gave him so many ways that he has to figure it out
himself.

What About Bob (And His House)?

Of course the ghostly presence that hovers over Sundance is Robert Redford. In
the early years, he was around the lab more, but work has kept him away for the
past few years.

He has also chosen to keep his distance, though, because his star presence
receives a distracting amount of attention. "I felt from the start that if the
lab depended on me keeping it alive financially and spiritually, it wouldn't
work," he said from Las Vegas, where he is currently acting in a film, "Indecent
Proposal." He said, "The lab had to stand on its own, and this is the first year
I really feel that it can."

He did turn up one night toward the end of this year's lab -- "like the caboose
on the train," he said -- to introduce a screening of the new film he has
directed, "A River Runs Through It."

Two weeks earlier there had been a pool party for the workshop members at the
Redford house at Sundance. There was no Redford, but many people remember
spotting a moose. The day was cold and overcast, and that night, in the dead
center of June, it snowed.

That was as unpredictable as whether any of this year's lab films will make it
to the screen and, if they do, in what form. But don't forget that a
sober-minded script by J. F. Lawton called "3,000" passed through the Sundance
lab. Sold to Hollywood and revised by another writer, it turned into "Pretty
Woman." That was not a Sundance thing to do.

NAME: Todd Graff; Jamal Joseph; Robert Manganelli

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Setting up equipment against some steep natural competition.
(Sandria Miller for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Todd Graff -- The actor and
writer is so hot that he might direct Madonna's next movie, though he has never
directed a film before. The grounds of the Sundance Institute, site of the
annual lab. Robert Manganelli -- Three agents said they threw his script in the
trash, but at Sundance the verdict was: "He has something!" (pg. 12)(Photographs
by Caryn James for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION VIEW;
The Young, the Restless And the Socially Aware

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2225 words


Ridiculous! Preposterous! Yes, and indestructible! The daytime soap opera,
television's most original contribution to popular entertainment, has faced
possible extinction more than once over the past decades and then has confounded
detractors by striking out in new directions and ending up livelier than ever.
And it's happening again.

No daytime executive is likely to insist that, after decades of creeping change,
soap operas are now enlightened arenas of social awareness and responsibility.
Certain subjects, abortion being the most prominent right now, remain off
limits. Lower rungs of the social ladder are virtually ignored; residents of
soaps could hardly have been prepared for the recent racial explosions in Los
Angeles. Weddings, births and murder trials are still most favored gimmicks for
grabbing an audience.

But there is a new sophistication in both style and content. A broad range of
serious issues are being tackled on soaps, and increasingly so. One key reason:
Daytime audiences are also privy to the slew of talk shows, from Oprah Winfrey's
to Sally Jessy Raphael's, in which every possible sort of human behavior and
foible is discussed in excruciating detail. "Next on Donahue," promised the
announcer on one commercial break, "My Mother Was a Slut." For better or worse,
the chance of offending delicate sensibilities grows ever more remote in the
tell-all world of the public confessional.

On the soaps, the more sensational topics like rape and incest have never been
in short supply. But the writers obviously read newspapers and watch talk shows,
and their scripts now encompass other current concerns. The issue of illiteracy,
for instance, surfaced this past year for at least two attractive young
characters, Dru on the top-rated "Young and the Restless" (CBS), and Jason on
"One Life to Live" (ABC). The problem of alcoholism is drawn in subtler strokes,
seen primarily as a disease in the case of young Hayley on "All My Children"
(ABC), but perhaps growing into a character defect for Asa Buchanan on "One Life
to Life."

As more black performers become contract players on daytime dramas -- their
numbers are still relatively few but steadily improving -- there has been a
noticeable increase in interracial love stories, inevitably featuring a black
woman and a white man. Jessica the attorney and Duncan the debonair Scot,
perhaps the most successful of these couples, have been cultivating their
relationship very, very slowly and carefully on "As the World Turns" (CBS). (The
troubling issue of racial bias is generally shunned by the soaps, one of the few
recent exceptions being on "All My Children" when young Terence was attacked by
white bullies.)

By far the loudest message coming out of audience research, soap executives say,
is a desire for women characters to be stronger, more independent and
self-sufficient. While the concept of family remains important, viewers are not
very enthusiastic about women depicted primarily as appendages to men. Then, of
course, there is the blazingly hot issue of sexual harassment. Right now on "The
Young and the Restless," Cricket is plotting revenge on Michael, the hotshot
lawyer who would boost her new law career in exchange for sexual favors. Michael
was clever enough never to have witnesses around, and except for her husband,
nobody will believe Cricket. But just wait.

The past several years have been dicey for soaps as ratings dipped, in line with
the rest of network schedules, and producers were urged to rein in budgets.
After all, game shows and talk formats are cheaper than daytime dramas. Today,
though, a new energy can be detected in certain soap quarters.

Among the newer creative collaborations in soaps, one of the more intriguing
involves the "One Life to Live" team of its executive producer, Linda Gottlieb,
and its head writer, Michael Malone. Her production credits include the film
"Dirty Dancing." He is the author of several favorably reviewed novels, the
latest being "Foolscap." Arriving in soapland about a year ago, neither could
claim much previous acquaintance with daytime drama, but both were enthusiastic
about the possibilities. Their bustling ABC studios in Manhattan, housing a
staff complete from directors to costume designers, prompted memories of
Hollywood factories in the 1930's, the ones that occasionally turned out
something brilliant.

Story lines for "One Life to Live" (three or four are usually in simultaneous
rotation) have become even shorter, with a greater abundance of middles and
ends. Faces aren't always as pretty as the daytime norm, perhaps with more of an
"ethnic look." Stories are being tailored more closely to the personalities of
the actors, Mr. Malone says, a creative decision similar to that of "doing
choreography on a dancer." Ms. Gottlieb brings to the scene a film maker's
approach, focused on postproduction editing and elements like music. Lee
Holdridge created the show's new theme, and mood music is employed more
extensively. Long gone are the days when every other scene faded out, with organ
music, on a close-up of a trembling coffee cup.

Mr. Malone, who has taught fiction at Yale, Swarthmore and the University of
Pennsylvania, reaches past Hollywood to Shakespeare's Globe Theater to explain
his delight at being able to make up characters and then rush over to the studio
and see them in flesh and blood. In novels like "Time's Witness," Mr. Malone has
written long, rather complicated stories peopled with dozens of characters, his
favorites obviously being the most colorful. So it's not surprising these days
to find "One Life to Live" giving new prominence to Luna, an endearingly spacey
young woman whose exploits have already included sessions with an odd radio
host, played by Dick Cavett in a Howard Stern fright wig.

Currently the series is exploring, gingerly to be sure, the subject of
homosexuality or, to be more precise, homophobia. A boy in his early teens,
evidently a virgin, decides that he is gay and looks to his minister for advice.
Several weeks ago the secret got out and some of the town's good citizens began
harassing not only the boy but the minister who is being supportive. However
tentative, this is the kind of continuing story line, scheduled to run through
the summer, not likely to be even touched on prime time. Any sympathetic
depiction of a homosexual character can still get certain protest groups into a
righteous lather. The willingness of ABC and "One Life to Live" to take a
calculated risk is, at the very least, noteworthy.

Teen-agers have long been among the soaps' most popular characters. Now soaps
for younger audiences are by far the busiest trend in current programming, with
Fox's "Beverly Hills 90210," Nickelodeon's "Fifteen" and the syndicated "Swans
Crossing," not for a moment to be confused with Proust's "Swann's Way."

MTV has recognized that soaps enjoy a widespread following on college campuses,
and the music-oriented cable service is trying to crack the market with "The
Real World," its cast consisting of seven twentysomething non-actors herded into
a Manhattan loft to interact as naturally as possible in front of video cameras.
The MTV effort is called "a reality-based soap opera" but the results so far,
without the benefit of writers and scripts, only demonstrate that whipping up a
soap is not as easy as it looks.

But when they work, their success can be perennial. Even without tracing their
literary roots to the the Arabian Nights tales of Scheherazade or the serialized
novels of the 19th century, the kind Charles Dickens churned out, soaps can
claim an electronic longevity unparalleled in the entertainment business. This
year CBS's "Guiding Light," which made its debut as a 15-minute radio serial in
1937, is celebrating its 40th anniversary on network television. Runs of 20 or
30 years are commonplace among the 11 daytime dramas that are presented Monday
through Friday, 52 weeks a year.

Each has its own production staff, writers and repertory company of actors, all
caught up in a unique enterprise described quite aptly by one veteran executive
as "the train that never stops." But the passengers and their attitudes do keep
changing, even as the basic story formats, revolving around families and
relationships, love and conflict, remain as rigid as any medieval-quest yarn.

The on-screen fates of soap characters are linked to everything from audience
research with focus groups to the sudden decision of an actor to leave a series.
Although the latter development is becoming less serious a problem as,
increasingly, viewers are simply informed by an off-camera announcer that a
certain role is being filled, temporarily or permanently, by another performer.
Surely, in the sense of being frequently indifferent to questions of consistency
and continuity, soaps are the perfect embodiment of trendy postmodernism.

Behind the scenes, landmarks in soap opera history are linked to a relative
handful of names: Irna Phillips, who created for CBS the first major half-hour
serial, "As the World Turns," in the early 1950's; Agnes Nixon, who brought to
ABC "One Life to Life" in 1968 and "All My Children" in 1970; and William J.
Bell, who upped the glitz-and-flesh ante in 1973 with CBS's "Young and the
Restless," later to be supplemented with "The Bold and the Beautiful."

A key shift in traditional administration took place in 1978 when Gloria Monty
took over as producer of ABC's "General Hospital." Instead of a show being
controlled by its creator and a stable of writers, it was now overseen by a
collaboration of executive producer and head writer. "General Hospital" made
scenes shorter and sets splashier, eventually hitting a payoff of sorts with the
1981 wedding of the characters Luke and Laura, attended by Elizabeth Taylor (as
a character she had portrayed on the show earlier) and racking up the highest
ratings ever for daytime television.

In the end, soaps can be glorious grab bags, full of dizzying surprises. In the
past year or so, viewers could have found anything from a full-fledged
black-and-white film-noir parody of Sam Spade detective stories to a fashion
show held aboard the QE2. A memorably nasty villainess on "The Young and the
Restless," mistakenly thought to have been killed in a fire, simply moved over
to "The Bold and the Beautiful," where she is now plotting further horrors. And
then there's Susan Lucci of "All My Children," nominated and passed by 13 times
for the Daytime Emmy as outstanding lead actress. Losing has brought her more
publicity mileage and respect than winning ever could. At the recent ceremonies,
wiping away tears of gratitude, she received a standing ovation from her peers.

That recent NBC broadcast, live from New York, of "The 19th Annual Daytime Emmy
Awards" captured the sense of revived spirit as nominees accepted their prizes
exuding a zesty combination of justifiable pride and, with a knowing wink,
understandable sheepishness. Significantly, the ceremonies, long considered too
much like a poor relation to merit a prime-time showcase, became the week's
top-rated program.



HOW THE SOAPS STICK TO THE ISSUES

Of the 11 daytime soap operas, all have at least one socially relevant story
line currently unfolding. Here is a sampling.

 * "All My Children" (ABC): The battered-wife syndrome. Carter is out of prison,
back in Pine Valley and already making trouble for his wife, Galen, who has been
the victim of his physical abuse before.

* "Another World" (NBC): The problems of Amerasian children. Lily believes that
her father, an American soldier who died in Vietnam, never loved her.

* "As the World Turns" (CBS): Interracial romance. Duncan, who's white, and
Jessica, who's black, are engaged. Tune in for an August wedding and see which
of their friends and family stand by them.

* "The Bold and the Beautiful" (CBS): Late-in-life pregnancy. Sally, who is in
her 50's, went through amniocentesis and learned about the risks to herself and
her child. Now the baby's here, but Clarke has left her.

* "Days of Our Lives" (NBC): Sexual harassment. Gavin, a college professor,
attacked Molly, a student who also works for him. She's pressing charges.

* "General Hospital" (ABC): Alcoholism. A. J. Quartermaine still doesn't realize
that his drinking is a problem, though it led to a car accident that almost
killed him and Nikki. Karen Wexler's mother, Rhonda, has the same problem.

* "Guiding Light" (CBS): Breast cancer. Lillian, a nurse, has had her mammogram,
biopsy, treatments, support-group meetings and a bout with denial.

* "Loving" (ABC): Custody. Trisha and Trucker are fighting for the child she
gave birth to after leaving him.

* "One Life to Live" (ABC): Homophobia. Billy, a teen-ager, told his minister he
was gay. The town is in an uproar, assuming the minister, because of his
sympathetic reaction, must be homosexual, too.

* "Santa Barbara" (NBC): Child abuse. B. J., who was molested at the age of 10
by her godfather, has carried the secret for years. That's about to change.

* "The Young and the Restless" (CBS): HIV testing. When Victoria asked Ryan to
be tested, he said no. When Nina asked, he said yes. So far all tests are
negative. But who does Ryan really love? -- Anita GatesArts & Leisure Desk

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Susan Lucci, with Walt Willey, on the soap opera "All My
Children" -- She's not just an appendage. (ABC)(pg. 1); Hunter Tylo and Ronn
Moss in "The Bold and the Beautiful" -- Whiff of the past. (Geraldine
Overton/CBS); Michael Swan and Tamara Tunie in "As the World Turns" -- CBS has
carefully and slowly cultivated a story line about interracial romance. (CBS);
Wortham Krimmer and Ryan Phillipe in "One Life to Live" -- One's gay, the other
isn't, but both are victims of homophobia. (Steve Fenn/ABC)(pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Toulon Journal;
Still Aching for Algeria, 30 Years After the Rage

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: TOULON, France


From her restaurant in the port of Toulon, Genevieve Navarro can see the haze
coming off the Mediterranean and the ships arriving from a country of which she
can hardly bear to speak.

"I won't go back there, ever," she said of Algeria, the land of her birth. Her
friends have returned there to find their former homes in ruins, their
neighborhoods run-down, and, most heart-wrenching, their parents' and
grandparents' graves desecrated.

Mrs. Navarro was 13 years old when France abandoned its fight to hold on to
Algeria, exactly 30 years ago. With reluctance she recalled those final days,
her terror, the random bombings and finally the airlift, the moment when she
became one of that day's 10,000 refugees.

By the time Algeria declared independence, on July 3, 1962, more than a million
French citizens had fled and poured into France. They found safety and built new
lives. But the trauma of the unpopular war and the humiliating way France ended
its 132-year presence left a legacy of pain and bitterness that has still not
disappeared.

'Part of the Defeat'

"The loss of Algeria was in some ways like the end of the Vietnam War," said
Jean-Marie Martinez, who, at the age of 17, was part of the flood of refugees.
"Many Frenchmen wanted the war to end because their sons were dying there. As in
Vietnam, this war was lost politically. And they hated the refugees because we
were part of the defeat."

The eight-year Algerian war tore France apart in often violent disputes between
those resigned to giving up and those who insisted that the land should remain
French. Some historians argue that the Algerian conflict still haunts this
country as much as another modern trauma: France's collaboration with the Nazis
in World War II.

While hardly comparable, both episodes continue to come under public scrutiny.
And today the French-Algerian war still incites political debate heartfelt
enough to bring renewed charges of French military brutality and bitter
finger-pointing by people on opposing sides. The commemoration has come with
exhibits and documentaries investigating those years. Thousands of returnees and
Algerian war veterans also staged a rally at Vincennes, outside Paris.

Mr. Martinez, today the town clerk of Toulon, said he had overcome his old anger
at Paris for giving up a war it could have won and at the French for despising
the repatriated refugees and branding ordinary workers' families like his own as
"dirty colonialists." Eventually, he said, he understood that only a decade
earlier France had lost its colonies in Indochina and the country "was
psychologically beaten down, filled with guilt."

Therefore, he said, "many Frenchmen idealized the Algerian rebellion," even
though French civilians were often the victims of atrocities, terrorist bombs
and assassinations.

Behind this reasoning lies another that is less charitable -- that many
Frenchmen opposed risking French lives to defend Algeria's Europeans. Many of
them were descendants of settlers from Spain, Italy, Corsica and Malta, and
Frenchmen saw them not as compatriots but as colonists who had picked up French
nationality but culturally were not recognizably French.

Cultural Gaps Still Exists

In many cases, that cultural gap still exists today, say refugees who take pride
in calling themselves "pieds noirs," or "black feet," the once-abusive epithet
often attributed to the black boots of the 19th-century French troops. Many
pieds noirs have integrated and succeeded in French society, among them Yves
Saint-Laurent, the couturier, and Bernard Attali, the president of Air France.

But here in southern France, where the majority settled, they often stick
together in associations and clubs and meet for evenings of their own food and
music. They find the French cold and distant.

At the Repatriates' House, a center for 17 "pieds noirs" associations around
Toulon, Louis Boutigny said that members met "to commemorate the dead, sometimes
to celebrate, more often to defend people who after all these years have not yet
been indemnified." Some have gone on missions to Algeria to restore the French
cemeteries.

Politicians are learning to reckon with the votes of the pieds noirs and their
descendants. Many support the far-right National Front party which has grown by
campaigning against Arab immigration in France. Here in Toulon, a city of many
pieds noirs, the Front won 29 percent of the vote in the March regional
elections.

Mrs. Navarro explained this by saying that none of her friends could reconcile
the past blood bath against the French in Algeria with France's recent
immigration policy. "After all that happened, Algerians have a right to come
here," she snapped. "If we protest, everybody screams we are racists."

'Our Government Is Blind'

Robert Mouton, a retired marine who fought in Indochina, Madagascar and Algeria,
said, "Our Government is blind."

As an intelligence officer in Algeria, he said, he lost all respect for France's
politicians. First they bungled the Algerian war, he said, and now, with their
liberal immigration policies, they are causing racial tensions in the country.

Today Mr. Mouton directs a social center for the so-called Harkis from Algeria,
Muslims who fought on the French side in the war. This is teaching him to take
advantage of the policies he criticizes.

France's great shame, he said, is the fate of the 60,000 Harkis, the veterans
who were received here first as liberators and then abandoned. Many are
isolated, uneducated and living on minute pensions.

"But our Government loves immigrants," he said with a smile. "So when a Harki
family needs help, I send them to one of the offices that give immigrants
assistance. And I tell them: 'Don't say you're a Harki. Tell them you're an
immigrant.' "

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thirty years after France abandoned its fight to hold on to
Algeria, the pain and bitterness of that unpopular war still have not
disappeared. Thousands of refugees and war veterans, who proudly refer to
themselves as "black feet," staged a rally at Vincennes, outside Paris, to
observe the anniversary. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Attacks Clinton Economic Plan as 'Big Mistake'

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


President Bush today delivered his strongest attack to date on the Democratic
Presidential candidacy of Bill Clinton, calling the Arkansas Governor's economic
proposals "smoke and mirrors" and "a big mistake" that would increase the
Federal deficit.

Mr. Bush said a 27-page economic plan Mr. Clinton issued in June would damage
the economy by raising taxes and the deficit. He also said Mr. Clinton's
proposals to save money by streamlining programs and reducing "overhead" were
illusory.

"What I see is a program that does not address itself to the deficit," Mr. Bush
said in a Rose Garden talk with members of Boys Nation, an American Legion
civics program. "I think we've got to get the deficit down. I don't think you
need to go raise taxes on people right now. I think that's a big mistake. I
think it's counterproductive."

Bad News on Economy

The comments came as Mr. Bush's advisers gave him a mid-year report on the
nation's economy, which most economists agree is stumbling partly under the
weight of the Federal budget deficit that has doubled, to almost $400 billion a
year, during Mr. Bush's tenure.

Mr. Bush's economic adviser, Michael Boskin, told the President that the annual
rate of economic growth had declined in the second quarter from the 2.7 percent
rate of the first three months of 1992, said one official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity.

The President's remarks appeared to signal the opening of a tougher and more
personal campaign style by Mr. Bush, who trails Mr. Clinton in public opinion
polls by 20 points or more. Until now, Mr. Bush has left it to his aides and
other Republican surrogates to mount direct attacks on Mr. Clinton and his
running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee.

Mr. Bush has long said he would refrain from attacking his opponents directly
until after the Republican convention next month, a pledge his press secretary,
Marlin Fitzwater, repeated today. On Saturday morning Mr. Bush stood offstage at
a rally in Provo, Utah, as that state's retiring Senator, Jake Garn, criticized
Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore as "pretty boys" who had never held jobs in the private
sector, and assailed Mr. Clinton's efforts to avoid the military draft during
the Vietnam War.

Mr. Clinton's spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, ridiculed Mr. Bush's statement
today, saying the Clinton campaign would match its economic proposals "up
against his any day of the week."

"George Bush has the worst economic record of any President since Herbert
Hoover," Mr. Stephanopoulos said. "If he wants to debate it, we're ready."

Mr. Clinton proposes $220 billion in spending on new public works programs,
education and tax cuts for families by 1996, to be offset by almost $300 billion
in spending cuts.

The combination of spending cuts, improved productivity and higher economic
growth would cut the Federal deficit by $150 billion over that four-year period,
Mr. Clinton argues.

In his comments, the President said that he and Mr. Clinton "have a big
difference on the economic approach" that the White House planned to highlight
in the fall campaign. But the two Clinton proposals that drew much of Mr. Bush's
fire today, commitments to reduce Government waste and to raise taxes on the
wealthy, are as notable for their political significance as any money they would
produce.

Merely making unspecified administrative changes, Mr. Clinton argues, would save
$22 billion by 1996 and streamlining the Pentagon's inventory would save $9.8
billion. Mr. Stephanopoulos said today that the savings would be produced by
applying private business practices to the Federal Government and imposing a 2
percent cut in Federal spending on items other than payrolls.

Mr. Clinton's savings proposals recall Ronald Reagan's pledge, as a Presidential
candidate in 1980, to reduce 2 percent of all nonmilitary Federal spending by
cutting "waste, extravagance, abuse and outright fraud." Many critics accused
Mr. Reagan of engaging in sophistry at the time, and Mr. Bush said the same of
Mr. Clinton today.

"When you analyze the program, they have this expression around here -- 'smoke
and mirrors,' " Mr. Bush said of Mr. Clinton's savings plan. "You're going to
save it all by eliminating overhead, eliminating waste, and there's billions of
dollars that is earmarked to do that, and I just don't think that's practical."

The President also attacked Mr. Clinton's proposal to raise $83 billion over
four years, primarily by raising the tax rate for the top 2 percent of wage
earners and placing a surtax on $1-million-plus incomes.

'Spending Too Much'

"I think the Government is spending too much," he said. "I don't think people
are taxed too little. I mean, I don't think that's the problem." The President
called tax increases "a big mistake" that would prove "counterproductive," a
reflection of the Administration's belief that tax increases reduce money for
investment and stifle economic growth.

Mr. Stephanopoulos agreed today that the Clinton plan called for more taxes on
the wealthy, but he said some of that money would be returned to the middle
class through a tax cut or a tax credit for children.

Other Administration officials expressed anger at Mr. Stephanopoulos's challenge
to compare the Bush and Clinton programs, noting that many elements of the
Clinton plan were identical with Mr. Bush's proposals. They include proposals
for a national integrated computer network, investments in magnetically
levitated trains and "smart" highways monitored by computers, tax credits for
research and development, urban enterprise zones and incentives to convert
defense industries to civilian uses.

"The one huge, screaming difference is that Clinton's is financed by a $150
billion tax increase, and ours is financed by cuts in entitlement spending and
nondefense spending," said one senior Administration official who spoke on the
condition of anonymity.

The group to which Mr. Bush spoke today, Boys Nation, teaches the tenets of
democracy and politics by staging mock elections and legislatures, and by
exposing young people to leading public figures. One person who got his first
taste of politics at Boys Nation was Mr. Clinton, who still boasts a photograph
of himself shaking the hand of President John F. Kennedy at a 1963 meeting of
the group.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush with members of the American Legion's Boys Nation
program during a question-and-answer session in the Rose Garden. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Sales of Arms to the Third World Declined by 22% Last Year

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


Arms sales to the third world fell sharply last year as the United States, the
Soviet Union, France and China all cut back sales, the Congressional Research
Service reported today.

Total sales fell 40 percent, to $24.7 billion, the lowest level in at least
seven years, from $41.1 billion in 1990, the research agency said.

The United States, which surpassed the Soviet Union as the biggest supplier in
1990, accounted for 57 percent of all sales in 1991, the report said. United
States sales to Saudi Arabia alone exceeded the total value of Soviet weapons
sales to the third world last year, the report said.

Saudi Arabia, the biggest United States customer, spent $5.6 billion, accounting
for nearly 40 percent of total United States sales to the third world last year.


Sharp Drop in Soviet Sales

Soviet arms sales to the third world fell 55 percent last year, to $5 billion,
from $11.2 billion in 1990. Moscow was still the second-biggest supplier, but
the value of its arms-sales agreements last year was far below the peak of $24.8
billion in 1986.

The report, delivered to Congress today, is based on data supplied by the
Defense Department and United States intelligence agencies.

Richard F. Grimmett, a defense specialist who prepares the report each year,
cited various reasons for the reduction in arms sales: the end of the cold war,
the erosion of the Soviet Union, which was dissolved in December, and the
enforcement of an arms embargo against Iraq, which had been one of the biggest
buyers.

A Shift in the Market

In addition, Mr. Grimmett noted, organizations like the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank were encouraging third world countries to curtail
military spending as a condition of getting economic aid.

French arms sales to the third world plunged 87 percent last year, to $400
million, from $3.1 billion in 1990. Chinese sales fell 86 percent, to $300
million, from $2.1 billion.

A major reason for the decline in Chinese sales is that the Soviet Union
replaced China as the main supplier of weapons to Iran. Moscow sold no arms to
Teheran in 1984-87, but since then has sold $4.8 billion worth of weapons,
including warplanes, tanks and submarines, the research service said.

At the same time, the Soviet Union lost some of its biggest customers. Iraq had
been making multibillion-dollar arms deals with the Soviets every year, but can
no longer do so because of the embargo imposed by the United Nations in August
1990.

Moscow has eliminated the big subsidies offered to its friends in the past, Mr.
Grimmett said. As a result, Cuba, Vietnam, Syria and India are buying much less.
Indeed, the report says Cuba, which bought $11.9 billion worth of weapons in
1984-87, concluded no purchase agreements with Moscow in the following four
years.

United States arms sales to the third world had risen to a record $18.2 billion
in 1990, partly because of large contracts signed with Saudi Arabia after Iraq
invaded Kuwait. Sales fell 22 percent last year, to $14.2 billion.

From 1988 through 1991, the United States accounted for half of all arms sales
to the Middle East: $36.5 billion out of a total of $73 billion. Those sales
accounted for three-fourths of the value of all weapons the United States sold
to the third world in that period.

With cuts in the Pentagon budget resulting from the end of the cold war, Mr.
Grimmett said, arms manufacturers are trying to increase sales to foreign
countries to compensate for "lost domestic orders." But, he noted, Britain,
France and other countries are trimming their military forces, so their arms
makers also want to sell more overseas.

"More and more arms suppliers are likely to be pursuing a smaller and smaller
list of buyers with the ability to pay," Mr. Grimmett said. "In the next few
years, economic factors may be more significant than any arms control regime in
restraining the international arms trade."

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Model Cities Work, but Enterprise Zones Won't

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


To the Editor:

In an editorial 26 years ago, give or take a few months, you proclaimed the
Model Cities program (then called Demonstration Cities) dead. You predicted that
the program -- concentrating billions of dollars in demonstration grants to
cities -- was doomed to defeat in Congress and destined to fail as too cautious
a response to urban problems.

You were wrong then. Model Cities, far from expiring or being insufficient,
became law and continued to survive under different names in hostile or
indifferent administrations down to the Reagan Administration. Today it is
acknowledged, not only for its capacity to stimulate physical and social renewal
in neighborhoods but, more significant, for encouraging grass-roots political
participation. Many inner-city residents moved from their first venture in Model
Cities politics to elected and appointed leadership positions in our cities.

So, 26 years later, in "The Muddled Model Cities Model" (editorial, July 3), you
are wrong again. With no attention to the now well-documented record of how the
program began and how it expanded, you fall back on the dubious 1970 figures of
neoconservatives who asserted that a "few" cities grew to 75 and then to 150.

Let me testify, as chairman of the task force under President Johnson that
recommended Model Cities, that the original proposal was for 82 cities and that
the subsequent expansion came over two years of planning grants. Even at 150
awards (for large, medium-sized and small cities), more than one-third of
Congress never had, in your terms, "a slice of the pork." The program remained
selective, a first example of the politics of innovation, instead of the
politics of distribution. Set down insufficient resources to the Vietnam War.

Finally, comparison with enterprise zones is misleading. The Model Cities
program, as Browning, Marshall and Tabb show in "Protest Alone Is Not Enough,"
an award-winning 1989 book, built a record of accomplishment in stimulating
renewal and empowering citizens across the country.

In contrast, 37 states have tried enterprise zones with disappointing results,
as reported by the General Accounting Office in 1988. Model Cities was the
product of empirical, verifiable evidence produced by social science research;
enterprise zones spring from the loosely woven tapestry of ideology, where
aspirations lose touch with reality. Whatever the appropriations, they won't
solve the fundamental problems of jobs, education and security that beset our
cities now.

ROBERT C. WOOD
Middletown, Conn., July 6, 1992

The writer was Undersecretary and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development,
1966-69.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Travel Books That Nourish a Vision

BYLINE: HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 958 words


It is generally more rewarding to read about someone else's travels than to hear
about them (especially when there's a slide show). Vita Sackville-West had it
right: "There is no greater bore than the travel bore. We do not in the least
want to hear what he has seen in Hong Kong." But even seasoned travelers carry
visions in their mental luggage: romantic encounters, unspoiled locales,
recaptured youths, imagined historic times, and a good book can nourish the
pursuit of those visions.

Here is a decidedly mixed handful of readable books that take the reader not
only across but above the United States, as well as to the towns of Europe and
the islands of Oceania.

AMERICAN PLACES: A Writer's Pilgrimage to 15 of This Country's Most Visited and
Cherished Sites, by William Zinsser. (200 pages, HarperCollins. $20.) This
inspiring guide includes places everyone means to go to some day, all described
with the usual clarity of the author of "On Writing Well." A reader ticks off
the well-known destinations: Mount Rushmore, Lexington and Concord, Niagara
Falls, Yellowstone Park, the Alamo, Appomattox, Mount Vernon, Kitty Hawk,
Disneyland, Rockefeller Center, Pearl Harbor. Then some unusual places: Mark
Twain's Hannibal, Mo.; the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala.; Dwight D.
Eisenhower's hometown, Abilene, Kan.; the lecture and adult educational center
in Chautauqua, N.Y.

Mr. Zinsser personalizes each place, giving its history and adding his own keen
observations. In Montgomery, he interviews Maya Lin, who designed both the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and the Civil Rights Memorial; their
conversation turns to the people who were killed during the civil rights
movement. After speaking to park rangers, librarians and curators, Mr. Zinsser
says, "The eloquence of the so-called ordinary man or woman is the most
extraordinary resource waiting for any writer who goes looking for America."

THE CANNIBAL QUEEN: An Aerial Odyssey Across America, by Stephen Coonts.
(Illustrated. 344 pages. Pocket Books. $22.) The novelist describes a flight
with his 14-year-old son in a 1942 open-cockpit biplane across the United
States. The plane, named "Cannibal Queen," was built as a trainer for the Royal
Canadian Air Force, declared surplus, used for crop dusting, then bought by the
author. He discovers that you can fly an airworthy plane anywhere in the country
without a flight plan or anyone's permission.

From the perspective of his biplane looking down on Mount Rushmore, Mr. Coonts
decides that his candidates for additional faces carved on the cliff are
Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., "the two greatest
Americans of this century."

AMERICA EATS, by Nelson Algren. (Illustrated. 123 pages. University of Iowa
Press. $22.95) Anything by Nelson Algren deserves notice. This book, a rarity,
was written in the late 1930's when the novelist worked with such writers as
Saul Bellow and Richard Wright for the Illinois Writers Project, a branch of the
New Deal Works Progress Administration. While researching the book, Algren
traveled around the Midwest, wrote about what farmers were growing, cooks
cooking, restaurants serving. It's a portrait of ethnic America, with recipes
for Russian pancakes, Spanish eggplant, English scones, Hungarian goulash,
Flemish booya ("30 pounds of ox tails, 10 pounds beef soup bones, 4 fat hens")
and other hearty, cholesterol-packed eats.

Like his prose poem, "Chicago: City on the Make," this gustatory travel junket
is pure Algren: "These are the blue plate specials, the streamlined steaks and
the laborer's lunch pail, passed down an endless boarding-house table from a
brave in buckskin to a blue-turbaned voyageur, from a coonskin Yankee to a
drawling steamboatman, from a Negro fish-vendor to an Irish section hand."

ASTONISHING WORLD: Essays, by Barbara Grizzuti Harrison. (285 pages. Ticknor &
Fields. $22.95.) This collection of essays includes sojourns in Tuscany, Sicily,
Dubrovnik in Yugoslavia and Morocco, not to mention lively interviews with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in Albany and Gore Vidal in Rome. Ms. Harrison, who never forgets
that her roots are in the old Bensonhurst neighborhood of Brooklyn, is unafraid
to allow her emotions to show through her observations.

"Shopping in Morocco has become for me a transaction almost as personal as sex,"
she writes. "The Astonishing World" continues the autobiographical style of her
keen "Italian Days" and "The Islands of Italy."

THE HAPPY ISLES OF OCEANIA: Paddling the Pacific, by Paul Theroux. (528 pages.
Putnam. $24.95.) The novelist and travel writer goes from Australia and New
Zealand to Hawaii by way of Melanesia (the Solomon islands, Vanuatu, Fiji) and
Polynesia (Tonga, Samoa, Tahiti, the Cook Islands, Easter Island). Because of an
unexplained domestic crisis and a possible illness, he decides to get away from
it all. So he packs a collapsible kayak, paddles around the islands, camps on an
aboriginal reserve, hikes mountain trails and encounters natives and tourists in
civilized Oceania.

He can be the toughest of travel writers: "When France has succeeded in
destroying a few more atolls, when they have managed to make the islands glow
with so much radioactivity that night is turned into day, when they have sold
the rest of the fishing rights and depleted it of fish (already Tahiti and the
surrounding islands have been overfished), when it has all been thoroughly
plundered, the French will plan a great ceremony and grandly offer these
unemployed and deracinated citizens in T-shirts and flip-flops their
independence."

Mr. Theroux's sharp eye and tongue make his "Happy Isles of Oceania" a strong if
not always cheerful reading adventure.


LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Theroux. (G. P. Putnam's Sons)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Asian Nations Hope to Settle Dispute Over Islands Peacefully

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: MANILA, July 22


Foreign ministers from across Southeast Asia, reflecting a growing fear of
China's military intentions in the region, called today for a peaceful
resolution of disputes over a chain of tiny islands in the South China Sea
coveted by Beijing and thought to be rich in oil.

Earlier this year China claimed sovereignty over the entire chain of the Spratly
Islands, which it calls Nansha, and in June Beijing announced it had contracted
with the Crestone Energy Corporation, of Denver, to explore for oil and gas in
the area.

The Chinese move angered and alarmed the other five nations that claim all or
part of the Spratlys: Vietnam, Taiwan, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei.

Call for Restraint

In a joint declaration issued here today at the annual meeting of foreign
ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the officials urged
that the dispute be resolved "by peaceful means, without resort to force." The
association's members are the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia
and Thailand.

The message was clearly meant for China, which has been willing to battle over
the Spratlys in the past: In 1988 its forces sank two Vietnamese warships in the
Spratlys, killing more than 70 Vietnamese, and Chinese soldiers were stationed
on several of the islands.

The unspoken fear is that China, capitalizing on Washington's pullout from its
military bases in the Philippines, will use the Spratlys to assert military
supremacy in the region.

An Added Sense of Urgency

The Philippine President, Fidel V. Ramos, warned during the conference that a
diplomatic failure could lead to "perilous developments."

The Spratlys, tiny uninhabited islands and reefs spread across several hundred
square miles of the South China Sea, are the subject of an old dispute. But
China's recent moves have added a sense of urgency, and they threaten to undo
the recent detente between China and its traditional adversary in Hanoi.

Vietnam, which resumed normal relations with China last year after years of
tension, has said that Beijing's oil-exploration plans in the Spratlys are
threatening the stability of the region. Vietnam also claims sovereignty over
all the islands and once awarded oil-exporation rights there.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Begins Releasing Documents on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 240 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


The Bush Administration began releasing thousands of classified documents today
on Americans still unaccounted for in the Vietnam War.

The start of the declassification of up to 1.3 million documents over the next
few months follows an executive order by President Bush on Wednesday to release
all P.O.W.-M.I.A material, with certain exceptions, for the first time since
American troops returned from Indochina in 1973.

The declassification was requested by the Senate this month by unanimous vote,
after the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs held a series of hearings on
assertions that successive administrations had known since the end of the war
that Americans had been left behind in Indochina.

"We have traveled a 20 years' journey in the space of nine months," Senator John
F. Kerry, chairman of the committee, said as he welcomed the release of the
documents today.

The committee will hold public hearings on this issue on Aug. 4 and 5. Senator
Kerry cautioned families today that these live-sighting reports have to be
considered in context, since many have been discredited.

Mr. Kerry also announced today that Ross Perot had agreed to testify before the
committee on Aug. 11. Mr. Perot, who had taken an active part in searching for
lost Americans and had made a private trip to Hanoi to meet the Vietnamese
authorities, had declined to appear publicly while he was still contemplating a
Presidential race.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
KIN OF MISSING G.I.'S HECKLE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


Capping a fractious week in which Republican fears about the stagnant Bush
campaign spilled into the open, President Bush lost his temper today in an angry
session with relatives of Americans lost in Southeast Asia, snapping at one
heckler to "shut up."

On the defensive already from the new Democratic ticket's surge in the polls,
Mr. Bush was jeered into silence today during a speech at the annual convention
of the National League of Families of P.O.W./M.I.A.'s in a Virginia suburb of
Washington.

Quayle to Stay on Ticket

Adding to the tension within the White House, there have been demands by some in
Mr. Bush's own party to replace Vice President Dan Quayle and other top
officials. But a White House official said tonight that the two men had
discussed the ticket in recent weeks and that they had decided that it should
not be changed.

"They talked this morning and I think that the Vice President intends to run
again and the President wants him to run again," the White House official said.
"It's put to rest. They discussed the ticket over the last week or two and the
conclusion is that the ticket will be Bush-Quayle again."

The Washington Post reported in Saturday's issue that close associates of the
President and Vice President had seriously weighed the effect of Mr. Quayle's
departure from the ticket and had asked for advice.

Among those Mr. Bush spoke with, The Post said, was Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d, who was reported to have advised that such a decision would be a
political mistake.

In Virginia today, several dozen hostile members of the audience of about 600,
who later said they had planned the outburst, angrily rejected the President's
assertion that his Administration had gone out of its way to determine the fate
of the missing men. They heckled Mr. Bush and held aloft pictures of servicemen
missing in the Vietnam War.

The protesters, mostly middle-aged and elderly relatives of the missing
Americans, were angry from the start. Only five minutes into Mr. Bush's speech,
a woman in the second row stood and interrupted him, calling out, "Mr.
President, Mr. President." At the same time, a large group of people stood and
began chanting: "No more lies. Tell the truth," and "No more lies. Release our
files."

At first Mr. Bush tried to mollify the crowd, noting, "I can't talk in here,"
but then his jaw grew tight and he began wagging his finger in the air at his
tormentors.

After calm had briefly been restored, a young man in the back stood up and
started to speak. At this new interruption the President snapped, "Would you
please shut up and sit down!"

Mr. Bush also had a testy conversation with one of the nine people sitting on
the dais, Jeff Donahue, a member of the league's board and the brother of an Air
Force captain missing in Laos since 1968. The two men pointed their fingers at
one another.

At one point the President yelled at Mr. Donahue, "Are you calling me a liar?"

'It's an Election Year'

When a woman in the crowd told Mr. Bush as he was leaving that she was
embarrassed by the heckling, he replied, "Well, it's an election year."

The President had stopped at the convention at the Crystal City Stouffer Hotel
in Arlington, Va., on his way out of town to go to campaign rallies in Ohio and
Missouri and spend the weekend in Kennebunkport, Me. But the trip to Maine was
canceled this afternoon when Mr. Bush decided to return to Camp David, Md., and
meet with his national security advisers for a review of his options in forcing
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to comply with efforts by the United Nations to
eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

The White House tried to put the best face on the day's events. In Ohio, Mr.
Bush said he was not upset, explaining to reporters: "I didn't blow my cool. I
just made an emphatic point."

Later, Torie Clarke, the President's campaign spokesman, reminded reporters that
Mr. Bush got a standing ovation at the end of his speech and said: "He has done
more for the P.O.W.-M.I.A. community than anyone. You've got to keep this in
perspective."

Praise From an Ex-P.O.W.

On the campaign trail the White House rushed to hand out copies of a letter from
Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican and former Navy pilot who spent five
and a half years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.

The Senator said in his letter that he watched the scene this morning "with
great disappointment," and added: "All those families whose loved ones have not
returned have never been better served by a President than they are by you. For
them and for myself, thank you and God bless you."

But the incident was clearly the latest embarrassment for a White House that has
been fumbling its recent attempts to improve the President's public image.
Watching the Democratic nominees' bus tour from New York to St. Louis and
frustrated by what they see as the excessive caution of Robert M. Teeter, the
campaign chairman, who does not think it is time for Mr. Bush to make any bold
campaign move yet, White House and campaign officials have started asking
reporters privately if the Bush team was in danger of losing.

Bush aides clearly thought that this morning's event was a chance for Mr. Bush
to showcase his leadership in the Persian Gulf and to remind voters of his own
harrowing service in World War II in the Pacific, where he was shot down while
flying a torpedo bomber.

Gary Bauer, the head of the conservative Family Research Council, said he was
shocked when he watched segments of the event on television. "Right now," he
said, "the perception is that there is no price to be paid for tweaking the
President's nose, and that is a very dangerous idea to be abroad in the land 90
days before the election."

Instead, it was Mr. Bush who paid the public relations price, when he found
himself -- to a smattering of applause and a lot of hooting -- defending his
record, his patriotism and his sensitivity. As a defense on the sensitivity
issue, the distraught President even brought up the death of his 3-year-old
daughter, Robin, of leukemia in 1953.

"I can identify with those who served," he said. "And I can identify with their
sacrifice. I can identify as a father who lost a child with the family
implications -- but again, I'm not trying to put myself on the same plain with
those who have suffered a lot."

'The Same Old Garbage'

One of those who took part in disrupting the President's speech was Lou Ann
Pike, from Lemoore, Calif., whose husband, Lieut. Comdr. Ennis S. Pike, has been
missing over Laos since March 23, 1972. "We planned this last night," she said.
"Bush has promised and promised and he has never delivered. Many of the family
members are fed up with the same old garbage year after year."

Colleen Shine, a member of the league, said she was chagrined by the jeering,
although she sympathized with the protesters' concerns.

"They didn't give him time to say what he had to say," said Ms. Shine, 27, whose
father, Lieut. Col. Anthony C. Shine of the Air Force, was last seen flying over
the Laotian-North Vietnamese border on Dec. 2, 1972. "I didn't feel it was the
best time or place for a demonstration. I don't feel it's effective in terms of
getting an accounting of our missing relatives."

Mr. Bush's plans for the weekend were changed by his Camp David war council, but
many in the campaign and the Republican Party breathed a sigh of relief that he
was not continuing on to Kennebunkport, where photographers would be able to
capture images of Mr. Bush at patrician play.

The President's stops in Brookville, Ohio, and Columbia, Mo., were smoother than
his morning appearance, although his campaign message was drowned out by the
news on the situation with Iraq.

He tried to cast himself as a necessary protector, telling the flag-waving crowd
at Brookville that he should be re-elected because he "kicked Saddam Hussein out
of Kuwait" and because he has the skills to protect Americans from "some
unpredictable enemy."

Bill Clinton and Al Gore may have cast themselves as the young, fresh
alternative to the 68-year-old incumbent, but Mr. Bush today cast himself as the
young, fresh alternative to an old, tired Congress. "Terms of Presidents are
limited," he said. "What's wrong with limiting the terms of some of these old
geezers that have been there forever?"

He did not mention his opponents' names. But the President made a slip of the
tongue when he said, "Let that new ticket talk about change, and I'll lay my
record up against them any single day for constrictive change for the United
States." He meant to say "constructive."

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush lost his temper yesterday when he was heckled
while speaking to National League of Families of P.O.W.-M.I.A.'s. He confronted
league members Jeff Donahue and Diane Van Renselar. (pg. 1); Members of the
audience at the meeting of the National League of Families of P.O.W.-M.I.A.'s in
Arlington, Va., holding pictures of their relatives yesterday as they disrupted
President Bush's speech. (Associated Press) (pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
How TV Covered Bush's Hecklers

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 177 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


Was President Bush humiliated today by scores of angry hecklers or was it merely
the sort of slight disruption that every politician endures now and then? It
depends on which television network you watched.

All three major networks reported the incident in the first five minutes of
their evening broadcasts.

On CBS and NBC, the episode came off as far more serious than on ABC. Both CBS
and NBC devoted more time to Mr. Bush's angry retorts and to the pictures of
furious people. NBC said there had been "scores" of hecklers; CBS said there had
been "about two dozen."

On the "NBC Nightly News," Mr. Bush appeared enraged as he was being shouted
down, though he was shown later in the day looking relaxed as he insisted that
"I didn't blow my cool."

On the "CBS Evening News," the reporter said the protest "drowned out the
President's message and overshadowed his entire campaign day."

But ABC's "World News Tonight" played down the episode, mentioning it only at
the end of a segment that showed Mr. Bush at a campaign rally later in the day.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Arab terrorists hijack a Puget Sound ferry. They manage to sail it into a naval
base and steal an American submarine fitted with nuclear missiles. They attach a
detonator, which will set off an explosion that will wipe out Washington State
and some of adjoining Canada, making the area uninhabitable for a thousand
years. The terrorists are willing to die as martyrs (a fanatic's best friend is
his martyr) unless their conditions are met.

In PRESSURE POINT (Putnam, $21.95), the author, Dick Couch, dumps all this in
the lap of the President of the United States. The President calls his advisers
together. Special teams are mobilized: Navy Seals (the author is a former Seal),
the Delta Force. Regular units of the Navy and the Coast Guard stand by. But how
can one attack a ship when the invaders can destroy part of the United States
and Canada with a touch of a button?

It can be done, when a novelist who knows how to tell a story is in charge. Mr.
Couch can tell a story. He is not the most graceful of writers, and his
characters are two-dimensional, but he keeps the pot boiling. "Pressure Point"
will enthrall the reader.

David Poyer's novel THE CIRCLE (St. Martin's, $21.95) is an entirely different
kind of sea story. Most of our sea thrillers pit 100 percent American heroes
against the ungodly. "The Circle," however, takes a realistic look at the United
States Navy.

Mr. Poyer gives us an ensign fresh out of Annapolis, assigned to a destroyer in
the North Atlantic. His ship is an obsolete bucket of plates and bolts held
together by mucilage. The ship is undermanned and has a resentful crew. The
executive officer is a sadistic right-wing bully.

Ship and crew battle furious storms. They are ordered to join the North Atlantic
fleet for exercises, and something terrible occurs that results in a
court-martial. The young ensign undergoes a trial by fire (figuratively and
literally). At the end the reader is sweating it out with him. Will justice
prevail, or will the ensign be sacrificed to the system?

Suspense stories about the drug trade are as common as penny loafers in the
Hamptons. MARIMBA, by Richard Hoyt (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95), is a superior
example of the genre, with an amoral family that will chill the blood, a
man-eating Doberman, double-dealing Federal drug agents and nonstop action.

The setting is Miami, where undercover Federal agents are infiltrating the drug
trade. The top dealers are wired into law enforcement agencies and pretty much
call the shots. The wires also extend into the halls of Congress, and Mr. Hoyt
has some penetrating things to say about the hypocrisy of Congress relative to
the drug traffic. In his last two pages Mr. Hoyt twists the knife, and it hurts.
Perhaps he is being theatrical, but it works.

Equally absorbing is FINAL ANSWERS, by Greg Dinallo (Pocket Books, $20). He
gives us a Vietnam veteran who goes to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and sees
his name listed among the dead. He starts getting in touch with the Veterans
Administration and other agencies, trying to find out what kind of bureaucratic
mix-up occurred.

Soon he is in over his head. Attempts are made on his life. Obviously, he has
stirred up something that certain people are determined to keep hidden. He joins
forces with a woman whose husband was shot down over Vietnam. She thinks he
might still be alive. Their quest leads them to Thailand and Laos.

What keeps "Final Answers" from being just another action novel is its sharp
insight into character, its fluid writing and its careful plotting. On the
surface the book might appear contrived, but Mr. Dinallo makes us believe. Two
nice people are caught in a terrible web, and the man must summon long-vanished
resources to extricate them. His daughter tries to keep him from chasing after a
person who has done evil to them. "Daddy, the man's a killer." He looks at her.
"So am I," he says.

Louis Charbonneau's STALK (Donald I. Fine, $18.95) is a chase-and-hunt novel in
which a former C.I.A. man is pursued by a rogue C.I.A. agent, for complicated
reasons. At the end the two men meet face to face in a shoot-out. There's
nothing new here, but the author is a professional, and everything moves rapidly
to the final convulsions.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CULTURAL VIEW;
You Can't Please All of the People . . .

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 2; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2706 words


Stung by three years of controversy, the National Endowment for the Arts
recently produced a nine-minute video explaining its mission and achievements.
Walter Cronkite, once the most trusted talking head on television, begins by
noting that the endowment represents one of the smallest parts of the Federal
budget; it is allocated just 68 cents annually for every American.

The rest of the video demonstrates how much that sum has bought. There are brief
shots of orchestras, ballet companies, circuses, children's festivals, pottery
making, the Vietnam Memorial, theater performances, museum galleries, folk
dancing, an American Indian ritual -- images punctuated by Ray Charles singing
"America." The video stresses two aspects of the endowment's labors: television
(a "medium of collective experiences") and community (where the N.E.A. helped
"make multiculturalism a reality long before it became a catchword").

Missing from the video is any hint of the controversies that have raged since
1989, controversies so familiar they can be summarized by a list of names --
Mapplethorpe, Serrano, Frohnmayer, Helms -- and a list of words -- censorship,
outrage, decency, quality. Publicly financed exhibitions of artworks that
included images of a jar of urine, a bullwhip and various bodily parts were
attacked and defended with principles far more important than the works
themselves.

Somewhere between the video's celebratory vision and the recent debates, the
underlying reason for the founding of the endowment seems to have been lost.
"Art is a nation's most precious heritage," Lyndon Johnson said upon signing the
law that created the National Endowment for the Arts in 1965, "for it is in our
works of art that we reveal to ourselves, and to others, the inner vision which
guides us as a nation."

But what is that inner vision today? Why, after 27 years and more than 90,000
grants, have the controversies increased? What conception of the arts does our
country have? And what vision does the endowment serve? The answers tell us much
about the status of contemporary culture and its discontents, and much, too,
about our "inner vision" or, as I think, the lack of it.

A few years ago, a corporation used an advertising slogan at its sponsored
cultural events: "It takes art to make a company great." The reason for founding
the National Endowment for the Arts was similar; it began as one of Johnson's
Great Society programs. But opponents of the legislation questioned whether the
Government should be involved. The argument was that political interference in
the arts is repugnant; the arts should be spared the typically deadening hand of
the Federal bureaucracy.

The fear of political interference still haunts the debate today. An agency
whose chairman is appointed by the President (with the advice and consent of the
Senate) and whose managing body, the National Council on the Arts, is composed
of 26 citizens, also selected by the President, is bound to be a political
institution (the advisory panels of artists and other citizens who make grant
recommendations, notwithstanding). And why not? Since the patron is the
Government, perhaps the grants should be somewhat political, reflecting the
country's view of itself and its arts.

The questions to ask then are, what sort of patron a Government can be, and what
sort of patron our Government has become.

Expansionism
Culture Becomes A Growth Industry

The endowment's philosophy is easy enough to discern from its recent
publications. Among the most revealing about how the agency sees itself and its
role and how it justifies itself politically to Congress and the public is a
106-page book entitled "Program Accomplishments." It was submitted to the House
Appropriations Committee in April 1991 by the endowment's chairman, John E.
Frohnmayer. President Bush dismissed Mr. Frohnmayer from his post last winter
because he did not satisfy the most conservative critics of the endowment. Under
his successor, Anne-Imelda Radice, who was appointed acting chairman in May, the
fundamental philosophy appears unchanged.

The N.E.A. has consistently seemed to treat culture almost as if it were an
economic system that had to display steady growth; every achievement is measured
in terms of numbers and "expansion." There is the expansion of dollars given and
dollars matched, of number of events and attendance. There is even an Expansion
Arts Program, whose goal is to "expand programming" to assure, as the 1991
report puts it, that "the maximum number of Americans have access to excellent
art." Expansion of access is admirable and important. But as American orchestras
have learned, it can also be harmful, leading to out-of-scale expenses and a
larger but less committed audience.

There are even times when the goal of expansion seems to become an obsession.
The N.E.A. boasts, for example, that in 1989 the Cleveland Opera presented the
premiere of "Holy Blood and Crescent Moon," the first opera by Stewart Copeland,
a rock composer: "It outsold the company's productions of the A-B-C of opera,
'Aida,' 'La Boheme' and 'Carmen,' as well as its 1987 production of 'Porgy and
Bess' by more than 61 percent." There was no word about the work's critical
failure, only about attendance. There is actually no direct relationship between
numbers and artistic achievement. Pop culture, which needs no patronage, will
always draw the largest audience.

Drive for Diversity
An Artistic Soup Of 170 Varieties

There is another, even more important aspect of the N.E.A.'s role as a
Government agency: it is preoccupied almost as much with constituencies as with
products. This means, in particular, racial and ethnic representation. The
agency claims that it serves 170 ethnic minorities. It even has a Folk Arts
Program that "helps insure that every American can find somewhere in the
endowment a place where his own people's artistic voice can ring loud and
clear." The N.E.A. has financially assisted: "Hmong needlework, coastal
sea-grass basketry, southeast Alaska native dance, American Indian basketry and
woodcraft, Pacific Island canoe building and Appalachian banjo playing."

Wonderful things come out of this diversity even though many grants amount to
just a few thousand dollars. But the endowment effectively declines to let its
own voice ring loud and clear. It argues that it "must not, under any
circumstances, impose a single esthetic standard." It even states that "each
traditional group has its own internal criteria for success." This means that
each culture can be judged only by its own rules.

So the agency's priorities are established demographically. The N.E.A. seems to
see its central mission as that of a democratic disburser of funds. Its
independent judging panels are analyzed geographically to within a tenth of a
percentage point. This year, 14 percent of panelists are from New York, 13.3
percent from the Central Plains.

Breakdowns are also racial. In 1991, 33.4 percent of the panelists were
"minorities" -- American Indians, Asians, blacks or Hispanics -- and 48 percent
were women.

The emphasis on diversity is increasing. In the 1987 fiscal year, 11.8 percent
of the budget went to "multicultural" programming; last year, 15.2 percent did.
In the 1991 fiscal year, 22.3 percent of all grants went to support arts
associated with minority communities. Geographically, since 1989, the proportion
of panelists from New York has declined by 36 percent (radically undervaluing
the city as an arts center); California, the country's other major center for
the arts, also was subject to rationing.

In all these cases, there are political arguments to be made for percentages:
the arts must serve an entire country; there may have been neglected areas in
past years. But the result is that a distribution curve becomes the determining
factor, supplanting esthetic judgment.

Given this cultural policy, the Mapplethorpe case and its descendants, with
their disputes over public sponsorship of material deemed offensive by some,
take on a different character.

There have been incidents throughout the endowment's history when grants were
objected to; in 1972, for example, Jesse Helms opposed the support given Erica
Jong's novel "Fear of Flying." But now the stakes have been raised. There is
more aggressive monitoring from political conservatives; objections have even
increased since the end of Ronald Reagan's Presidency. This is partly out of
conservative anxiety over the Bush Administration's less ideological stance.
Simultaneously, some segments of the arts world have become more radical and
explicitly political.

In addition, the endowment has aggravated tensions with its own apparent
inconsistency. Generally, the agency has declined to establish universal
criteria for judgment or to assert some idea of shared community; it has instead
been preoccupied with just the opposite, with giving each subgroup and interest
group an apportioned slice of the arts pie.

According to this view, the avant-garde arts lobby ought to be just another one
of these groups. Performance artists like Karen Finley or Tim Miller, who have
had grant applications rejected by the N.E.A., believe they speak for political
or sexual minorities. Once the endowment has taken the position that no standard
can be applied to all, that each minority group has its own culture and should
be judged by its own criteria, how can the agency suddenly assert standards that
transcend special interests? These artists intend to provoke; by their terms,
they succeed.

Their rejection has been labeled "censorship," as if freedom of speech were
being abolished simply because the Government declined to finance a particular
project. This view exists because of the common belief that the Government is
obligated to sponsor differing and provocative views. It is also precisely how
the N.E.A. has acted -- as if all varieties of expression were entitled to equal
time. The endowment has thus effectively abolished its own right to make
judgments, while factions in the arts community lobby for their causes with
increasing fervor.

Art and the Schools
Culture as Therapy, Not Enlightenment

When it comes to arts education in the schools -- which is already in a bankrupt
condition -- the problems multiply. In its 1991 report, the N.E.A. treats
education as an extension of its general populist philosophy, implying that
anybody can produce art, that no system of standards and values has more
validity than any other.

But art involves a study of techniques, a mastery of a body of knowledge. What
about meter and form in poetry, score reading and listening in music, brush
strokes and perspective in painting? What about the discipline of art? The 1991
report bypasses all this. In March, the endowment announced a major initiative
in arts education with the Department of Education; the question is whether
their call for "world-class standards" will mean real change.

The critic Robert Hughes has argued that in the United States art is often
treated as if it were therapeutic, as if it were meant to heal rather than
enlighten. This may indeed be the key to the endowment's democratic esthetics.
Here is how the N.E.A. describes a program designed to create an "in-depth
arts-in-education program" for schoolchildren in Augusta, Ga. It is aimed at
"improving general academic achievement, the general learning environment,
student self-esteem, attendance, creative thinking and social equity among
students." Everything for everybody, except world peace.

Government Patrons
Does a Democracy Allow for Elites?

The great patrons of the past were usually individuals of enormous wealth and
authority who asserted personal taste in granting commissions. This produced
much that was meretricious but nearly all that was magnificent as well. The
artworks commissioned by the Roman Catholic Church were really commissioned by
individual popes like Julius II and Clement VII, who employed Michelangelo. In
this country individual patronage has given us institutions ranging from the
Boston Symphony Orchestra to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.

Governmental patronage has a very different character. In countries with a clear
consensus about culture, where traditions are deep and uniform, large quantities
of money are available and often disbursed with great confidence. In France,
culture high and low is a Cabinet-level concern. Public arts support in West
Germany before unification traditionally amounted to more than a billion dollars
a year; the 1992 N.E.A. budget was $176 million.

But problems still arise. In Italy, getting a job in an orchestra can be a
matter of political party membership. In the Netherlands, there was, until
recently, a program under which visual artists received higher benefits if they
donated works to the state. By 1983, almost half a million works had been
donated, most accumulating in warehouses. A policy revision involving stricter
judgments of "quality" was finally introduced.

So confusion about taste, art and allocation is not American alone. But it is
aggravated by aspects of our culture. There is a tension between the elite
character of the fine arts and the American traditions of egalitarianism. In the
19th century, Alexis de Tocqueville predicted that American democracy would
change the character of art itself. The emphasis, he said, would be away from
the soul and toward the body; the arts would prefer motion and sensation to
sentiment and thought. In a democracy, he wrote, "the productions of artists are
more numerous, but the merit of each production is diminished."

The N.E.A. seems to be fulfilling this prophecy. Its promotional video focuses
on the body, on motion, on sensation, on quantity. Moreover, the agency, even
while supporting important projects in the fine arts, has followed the now
regnant belief that notions of "high" and "fine" are matters of aristocratic
snobbery. This is, of course, an extension of de Tocqueville's prediction:
esthetics has become egalitarian and even irrelevant.

Redrawing the Portrait
What Should The Endowment Be?

The N.E.A. has had its triumphs, but it continually stumbles over its own
philosophy.  The conservative critic and publisher of The New Criterion, Samuel
Lipman, who has served on the National Council on the Arts, has argued that the
endowment's policy of giving matching grants has stifled diversity in private
patronage. In a series of provocative essays he has suggested that the agency's
populism has distorted audience attentiveness and that Federal financing has
created a "formidable bureaucratic class of administrators and advocates," many
of whom may have less discernment than artists or donors. The result is an arts
industry, intent on growth and self-preservation, supported by Government
largesse.

What, then, should the endowment be? For the N.E.A. to be a more important
patron it would have to become even more controversial. It would have to
jettison its gerrymandering of funds according to geography, race, ethnicity,
style and idea. It would have to argue that some things may be worth financial
assistance that do not offer a social return on investment. It would have to be
democratic in its inspiration but elite in its tastes. It would have to give
priority to a national high culture that should provide a unifying frame for our
rich multiplicity of folk and popular cultures. Finally, it would have to
aggressively represent these positions in arguments for serious arts education.

Unfortunately, in our fractured culture, not much of this is possible. A
majority of the public (and perhaps many readers) may agree with the endowment's
approach to art; that is why the endowment boasts about it. Any N.E.A. that
exercised strong contrary convictions would be cut to pieces for its elitism or
narrow tastes. It may even be that the only National Endowment for the Arts we
can have is the one that already exists. In its occasional triumphs and
desultory character, it is a creature of the culture it supports. It is also, I
fear, a portrait of ourselves, a disconcerting reflection, not of "inner vision"
but of its absence.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A scene from Stewart Copeland's "Holy Blood and Crescent Moon"
at the Cleveland Opera -- Good numbers, bad press. (The Cleveland Opera); More
than a century after Alexis de Tocqueville, left, questioned the fate of art in
a democracy, Lyndon Johnson, right, signed a law creating the N.E.A.; the
endowment helped finance the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, bottom, and has
supported programs (like American Indian basketry, below right) devoted to
racial and ethnic minorities. (United Press International)(pg. 22)

Drawing (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Defying Jinx, McGovern Backs the Ticket

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


To the Editor:

"Democratic Platform Shows Shift in Party's Focus" (news article, July 14)
contains this paragraph: "Mr. McGovern thinks the Clinton-Gore approach is a
Trojan horse. 'I have a hunch,' he said, 'that they're much more liberal
underneath and will prove it when they're elected.' "

Picking up on this report of a brief telephone interview I did with your
reporter, President Bush has described me as "an incredibly insightful man," who
realizes that the Clinton-Gore ticket is guilty of liberalism.

This, of course, is the same crime Mr. Bush attributed to the Dukakis-Bentsen
ticket four years ago without benefit of a McGovern insight.

Indeed, I have noted for the last 20 years -- whether I am silent or talkative
-- some Republican politicians have found it useful to accuse Democratic
candidates of "liberalism" or, in extreme cases, "McGovernism."

What can I do about this as a loyal Democrat who favors a Clinton-Gore victory
-- just as I wanted victories by Dukakis-Bentsen in 1988, Mondale-Ferraro in
'84, Carter-Mondale in '80 and Humphrey-Muskie in '68? They all lost.

If in some way I have contributed to this Democratic carnage beyond the
McGovern-Shriver loss of '72, how can I be as "incredibly insightful" as the
President believes me to be?

Considering my record, one might suppose there are three ways in which I could
help the Clinton-Gore ticket: endorse the Bush-Quayle ticket, attack
Clinton-Gore or refuse to answer reporters' questions.

None of these options seem entirely satisfactory.

Instead, I offer these points:

I did not describe the Clinton-Gore ticket as a "Trojan horse"; I described it
as strong, appealing and quite possibly victorious. When asked if I was not
troubled by its conservative makeup, I said that I was not and that I believed
Bill Clinton and Al Gore would prove more liberal than some of their liberal
critics expect.

I had in mind their support for a strong jobs program, their record on civil
rights, their support for quality education, welfare reform, decisive
environmental action, national health care and a woman's right to decide whether
or not to have an abortion.

That is the liberal agenda and in my opinion it is a common-sense agenda that
should appeal to conservatives and independents as well.

I have never been ashamed of liberalism or conservatism. The creative tension
between these two central political traditions is the strength of America's
two-party system.

My mother and father were lifelong Republicans, who believed in such onetime
conservative doctrines as a balanced budget and loyalty to the Constitution. I
absorbed enough of their conservatism to make me appalled at the size of the
Federal deficit in the Reagan-Bush era. I blame both Republican Presidents and
the Democratic Congress for our scandalous national debt. I'm also sufficiently
conservative to be appalled by the scandals of Watergate, the Iran-contra affair
and the savings and loan grand larceny -- to say nothing of the bipartisan
Vietnam tragedy that so painfully weakened the nation.

I lean toward liberalism in the knowledge that nearly all public programs now
generally supported by Republicans and Democrats alike, such as Social Security
and Medicare, began as liberal initiatives pushed through over conservative
objections. I'm old-fashioned enough to believe that Republicans should be
conservatives and Democrats should be liberals. Perhaps that is why my old
Senate colleague Barry Goldwater and I admire and respect each other.

Many millions of dollars have been spent by negative campaign specialists to
depict me as an unstable radical or extreme liberal. For the record, I regarded
myself in 1972 as an American patriot, who loved his country enough to call it
home to its constitutional principles.

I see myself as a man of moderate temperament guided by common sense. The
somewhat conservative electorate of South Dakota elected me to high office for
nearly a quarter of a century. My political heroes are Jefferson, Lincoln and
Roosevelt. The "incredible insight" the President generously attributes to me
tells me that Bill Clinton and Al Gore may come a little closer to those giants
than George Bush and Dan Quayle.

I trust that this mild endorsement will not cause them excessive embarrassment.

 GEORGE MCGOVERN
Washington, July 20, 1992

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Data Show Mismanagement on Missing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


Pentagon investigations into its own handling of the issue of Americans
unaccounted for from the Vietnam War found a pattern of mismanaged files and
overworked officials more often motivated to dispose of cases than to pursue and
analyze them, newly released documents show.

Documents released Thursday under an executive order from President Bush
generally called into question the Pentagon's commitment to investigate
thoroughly all reports of "live sightings" of Americans who may have been left
behind in captivity in Vietnam, Laos or Cambodia when American forces were
withdrawn in 1973.

Officials in the Defense Department -- where the office dealing with
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs has recently been enlarged and upgraded under a new
Assistant Secretary of Defense, Alan Ptak -- now acknowledge that the attitude
of those responsible for investigating the cases of the missing and for dealing
with relatives contributed to the growth of conspiracy theories and lobbies of
disaffected families who no longer believe anything they are told by the
Government, like those who heckled President Bush on Friday not far from the
Pentagon.

"There exists a mindset to debunk," said a 1986 report prepared by a Pentagon
team led by Col. Kimball M. Gaines of the Air Force. "Intense effort is
initially focused on veracity of sources with a view toward discrediting them.
This penchant has overridden the seeking of the corroborative data necessary to
support the sighting."

In the same year, another task force headed by Lieut. Gen. Eugene Tighe, also of
the Air Force, found that there was some evidence to support the belief that
Americans might still be alive in captivity.

"There is information, even in our limited sample, which establishes the strong
possibility of American prisoners of war being held in Laos and Vietnam," the
Tighe report said.

Memorandums recently declassified show that the word "possibility" had replaced
"probability" between drafts of the document.

Pentagon officials said today that they were still examining 109 cases of "live
sightings" of Americans, 62 of them reported to be still in captivity. More than
1,800 other such files were declassified this week.

Vietnam denies that it holds any live Americans, as does the Laotian Government.
No missing Americans are believed to be in Cambodia.

The Gaines and Tighe reports are among seven internal Pentagon investigative
reports and memorandums declassified this week along with several thousand other
documents, the first batch of more than 1.3 million papers on the subject to be
released over the next few months by the Pentagon.

Under President Bush's order, signed Wednesday, documents are also being
released by the White House and the National Security Council.

The release follows a Senate request to the Administration to open all files on
the issue for the first time since the withdrawal of American forces from
Indochina. Hearings by the Senate Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, which
initiated the request, have elicited testimony from several high-ranking
officials that 244 Americans on Washington's prisoner of war list were not
returned by the Vietnamese in a prisoner exchange program in 1973.

Another major element in the documents released on Friday are 1,800 "live
sighting" reports. Despite some of the conclusions reached in internal
inquiries, an examination of some of those reports showed that the Defense
Department often went to exhaustive lengths to verify information it had
received describing the events of many years before.

One case cited information from "source 1542," described as a Vietnamese who had
passed two polygraph tests. The Defense Intelligence Agency assessed his
allegation of having sighted "a group of Caucasians" in 1978 and again in 1982
in what he called a prison in Hanoi. He said friends had described those people
to him as Americans.

Using photographic evidence and interviews with other Vietnamese, Pentagon aides
concluded that "Source 1542 described seeing American prisoners at a prison that
did not exist."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. Baker's World

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


Just one Presidential election cycle ago, some foreign policy professionals
found it hard to imagine James A. Baker 3d as Secretary of State. Now some of
those former skeptics worry about what will happen to important Baker
initiatives like the Middle East peace talks should the Secretary leave, as
expected, to try to salvage the Bush-Quayle campaign.

Mr. Baker has made his share of errors and squandered more than one major
diplomatic opportunity. Yet on balance he has been a particularly effective
Secretary of State, capably safeguarding American interests during a period of
tumultuous global change.

The main secret of Mr. Baker's success, besides his extraordinarily close
friendship with the President, was his refreshingly non-ideological approach to
international conflict. Coming to office just as the world was thawing out from
the cold war, Mr. Baker turned his lack of foreign policy experience into an
asset.

No personal stake in past policy wars wedded him to a continuation of futile and
destructive meddling in Central American military conflicts, to an appeasing
policy of "constructive engagement" with apartheid in South Africa or to cynical
cooperation with murderous Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia.

Indeed, Mr. Baker's first foreign policy initiative was to approach Congress for
agreement on a less militarized, more political approach to the Nicaraguan and
Salvadoran civil wars. Violeta Chamorro's subsequent electoral triumph and the
U.N.-mediated El Salvador peace agreement resoundingly vindicated his new
course.

He also took advantage of the sanctions Congress had passed over Ronald Reagan's
veto to strengthen South Africa's incentive to reform racist institutions. And
by abandoning the petulant policy of demonizing Vietnam, he helped win agreement
on a U.N.-sponsored Cambodia peace.

There were also lapses. Mr. Baker's policies, orchestrated with President Bush,
were neither uniformly popular nor uniformly brilliant. The reckless indulgence
of Saddam Hussein before Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait is a case in point.

On too many issues, from reaching out to the new democracies in Eastern Europe
to coping with ethnic warfare in Yugoslavia, the Bush Administration wasted
precious months dithering and procrastinating. It was slow to acknowledge the
demise of Mikhail Gorbachev and the rise of Boris Yeltsin. It failed to lock in
deeper arms cuts before political dissolution and nationalist pride in the
former Soviet Union made such cuts more difficult. It allowed relations with
Japan, now Washington's most important ally, to sour needlessly.

The Administration looked on with callous indifference as thuggish regimes
trampled human rights in China and Haiti. And only after a popular outcry at
home did it respond to the plight of Iraqi Kurds, a people Washington had
shamelessly encouraged to revolt and then abandoned to face Baghdad's guns and
gas alone.

Mr. Baker's defenders point out that the leading role in many of these policy
areas was played by the White House, not the State Department. But if the
Secretary of State and the President's First Friend didn't agree with important
foreign policies, why didn't he press his own views more effectively?

But it's simply not true, as some critics charge, that Mr. Baker only took on
those issues guaranteed to make him look good. Had that been so, he would surely
have stayed as far away as possible from the quicksands of the Middle East.

Instead he engineered the first formal face-to-face talks ever held among
Israel, the Palestinians and the Arab states -- a breathtaking achievement. In
the process, he and President Bush constructively redefined American friendship
with Israel, showing that it was possible to insure Israel's security and nudge
it toward greater flexibility at the same time.

That took political courage, and it paid off. Last month Israeli voters endorsed
the Bush-Baker approach by electing Yitzhak Rabin as Prime Minister. There's
good reason to hope the peace process can now accelerate, even if Mr. Baker soon
moves on to another role.

James Baker leaves his successor, Republican or Democrat, an impressive legacy
to build on. His failures were mainly of omission, and most are recoverable. His
greatest achievements, especially in the Middle East, can fairly be called
historic.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Horatio Alger With Deep Pockets

BYLINE: By James Chace;  James Chace, the Henry Luce Professor in Freedom of
Inquiry and Expression at Bard College, is writing a biography of Dean Acheson.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1877 words



SPANNING THE CENTURY
The Life of W. Averell Harriman,
1891-1986.
By Rudy Abramson.
Illustrated. 779 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company. $25.

OF all the major architects of postwar American foreign policy, only W. Averell
Harriman had the grueling experience of running for high public office. He was
the happiest of men when he was Governor of New York State from 1955 through
1958, and for the rest of his life he preferred to be introduced as Governor
Harriman. As Rudy Abramson tells us in "Spanning the Century," he would have
been even happier had he been called Mr. President.

In 1952, Harriman ran in the Democratic Presidential primaries against Gov.
Adlai E. Stevenson of Illinois. At 61 years old, he was a terrible candidate: he
was stricken by recurring attacks of stammering, and on the stump he had the
habit of swinging his arms and rocking on the balls of his feet, as though he
were about to break into a cheer of "Hup, hup, Harriman!"

The child of one of the great 19th-century railroad magnates, Harriman thought
of himself as "a rich man's son who took the poor man's side." He was a champion
of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and Harry S. Truman's Fair Deal, and as one
black minister put it when he urged his flock to vote for "Honest Ave," "He's
not going to steal any cabbage, he's already got all the cabbage he can use."

In "Spanning the Century," Mr. Abramson, a former Washington correspondent for
The Los Angeles Times, has produced an absorbing biography of a man whose career
was central to the creation of American foreign policy in the American Century.
Yet despite his access through social connections and business deals to the top
echelons of government, Harriman was never initially considered for high
appointive office by the Presidents he served. To find a place in government
worthy of his talents, again and again he ingratiated himself with his masters;
still, as Mr. Abramson convincingly demonstrates, once in a position of
authority he invariably performed at the highest level. His is the story of a
rich boy who constantly felt the need to achieve, to work harder than anyone
else on the block, and so ended up by serving his country with great
distinction. Nothing came easy to him, but he was determined never to give up, a
Horatio Alger with deep pockets. Writing with verve and distinction, Mr.
Abramson never lets this story flag, while at the same time displaying a
scholarly regard for the research and interviews indispensable for a serious
biography.

Averell Harriman did not have an easy childhood. His father, Edward Henry
Harriman, known as E. H., was considered a robber baron and a financial ogre by
many Americans. Yet he constantly badgered his son with lectures on honesty and
the heavy responsibilities of wealth. Always there was the pressure to do
better. It was no wonder that the teen-age Averell became a classic striver -- a
somber boy plugging away at his academic work while throwing his remaining
energy into athletics at the Groton School and later at Yale, from which he
graduated in 1913.

For the next quarter-century he was involved in a series of business ventures,
some of which were highly successful, others spectacular failures. Nine years
after the Russian Revolution, he negotiated with Leon Trotsky for mining
concessions in the Caucasus. The deal was a disaster, largely because the
Russians were unable to extract manganese efficiently. But his experiences
traveling in the Soviet Union and meeting with officials gave him a taste for
diplomacy and an insight into Soviet behavior that would shape his life.

He was one of the few powerful businessmen who supported Roosevelt in 1932,
because he disapproved of high tariffs, Prohibition and Herbert Hoover.
Roosevelt and Harriman were not particularly good friends: Harriman viewed
Roosevelt as a man of limited ability and accomplishments, and Roosevelt saw
Harriman as a son of new money who was better at playing polo than politics.
Introduced into the circle of New Dealers by his sister, who was a friend of the
Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins, Harriman agreed to work as an administrator
of the National Recovery Act. Later he served as chairman of a business advisory
council. Nonetheless, throughout the 1930's Roosevelt did not consider Harriman
a serious policy maker, and when the war broke out in Europe he did not offer
him a significant job.

It was only through Harry Hopkins, the former social worker who became
Roosevelt's alter ego, that Harriman finally got his first important post in
1941 -- as the Administration's special liaison to the British Government. After
Hopkins went to London to see what the British needed to carry on the war
against Nazi Germany, he concluded that Harriman, whose business and social
connections in Britain were extensive, was the man to oversee the lend-lease
program there. During Britain's darkest days, Harriman was embraced by Winston
Churchill as a confidant and became his invaluable interlocutor with Roosevelt.

Still, Harriman often had to force himself on the President. Whenever he felt
that Roosevelt was leaving him out of an important conference, he muscled his
way in. He would invite himself to meetings and lunches to which he had not been
explicitly excluded. Above all he would deluge his superiors, which more often
than not meant Roosevelt, with memorandums suggesting new policies or reporting
on his latest conversations with statesmen from Churchill to Tito to Stalin.
Then, as later, he was not always right, but he was often ahead of the other
advisers and bureaucrats in responding to the changing environment of world
politics.

Harriman's frequent visits to the Soviet Union led Roosevelt in 1943 to appoint
him Ambassador to Moscow, and in this post he witnessed the Kremlin's
obstructionist paranoia. He was soon warning the Administration of the pitfalls
of postwar cooperation with the Russians. He urged Washington not to show any
sign of weakness: unless the United States was willing to "take issue" with
Stalin when Soviet policies contravened our own, the Soviet Union would become
"a world bully." On the other hand, as Mr. Abramson frequently points out,
Harriman always believed the United States could do business with Stalin. Later,
when the cold war deepened, Harriman continually pressed for negotiations with
Moscow whenever he discerned a glimmer of an opening.

Excluded from Truman's summit meeting with Stalin, Churchill and Clement Attlee
at Potsdam in 1945, Harriman bided his time until he found a way to become
indispensable to the new Administration. That opportunity came in 1946 when
Truman needed someone to replace Henry Wallace as Secretary of Commerce, after
Wallace had openly criticized the Administration's hardening anti-Soviet stance.
With his ties both to the New Deal and to business, Harriman was ideally suited
in Truman's eyes to take over Wallace's department. The following year, Truman
sent Harriman to Paris to administer the Marshall Plan in Europe. But it was not
long before Truman wanted him as a personal trouble-shooter and called him home
to be his special assistant. For Harriman, bitterly disappointed that Truman had
named Dean Acheson rather than him as Secretary of State, the next best thing
was his new-found access to the White House.

Dwight D. Eisenhower's victory in 1952 put the Democrats, and Harriman with
them, out of office. But he found that his initial foray into practical politics
in that year's Presidential primaries had whetted his appetite for more. Mr.
Abramson describes him as a most improbable politician: scarcely able to
remember names and faces, he took to greeting people whom he had met more than
once with the salutation "Hello, stranger." Nonetheless, in 1954 the boss of
Tammany Hall, Carmine De Sapio, was looking for a gubernatorial candidate and
decided Harriman would do.

Harriman loved to campaign and went all over the state, lambasting Vermont
entrepreneurs for buying New York maple syrup, taking it home and then selling
it back to New York. He won a narrow victory over United States Senator Irving
Ives, and proceeded to give New York four years of clean, fiscally conservative
but socially progressive government. He worked 18-hour days and was always up at
the crack of dawn to hand out assignments to his chief lieutenants. One winter
morning, just as the sun was rising over Albany, he called his executive
secretary and woke up the man's wife with the question, "What are you doing?"
"We were having intercourse," she answered sleepily. But even this did not daunt
the Governor, who modified the time of his wake-up calls by only a few minutes.
After four years in Albany, he was defeated by his own appointee to a state
constitutional commission, another rich man's son, Nelson A. Rockefeller. The
Republican campaign largely rested on charges that Harriman was the pawn of
political bossism.

Access to the President once again became Harriman's problem in the Kennedy and
Johnson years. He was so eager to be part of the game that he was willing to
accept lesser assignments, and during the Kennedy Administration he agreed to
become Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs. But he soon proved
his mettle by bringing off a shaky neutrality settlement in Laos; later he led
the delegation that negotiated the limited nuclear test-ban treaty with the
Soviet Union.

In the waning months of the Johnson Administration, Harriman headed the American
delegation to Paris to seek peace with North Vietnam. Lyndon B. Johnson,
however, never fully trusted Harriman, whose ties to the Kennedys always
rendered him suspect, no matter how often Harriman tried to show his loyalty by
defending policies in Vietnam that he personally abhorred or flattering a
President he did not much like. This is not to say that Harriman opposed the
United States presence in Vietnam; like many of his colleagues, he initially
believed that Washington had to stand firm in Indochina or lose credibility with
its allies. For the remaining almost two decades of his life, he never again
played a significant role in world politics, but his personal life was blessed
by a happy third marriage, to Pamela Churchill.

At the end of Mr. Abramson's judicious and often penetrating account of W.
Averell Harriman, I found myself asking why I liked this rather remote,
humorless and hard-driving figure, almost shameless in his efforts to ingratiate
himself with whatever Democrat was in the White House. George F. Kennan, his
deputy in the Moscow embassy during the war, asked himself the same question,
and perhaps provided the best answer.

In his memoirs Mr. Kennan writes of Harriman: "He was a towering figure on our
Moscow scene, outwardly unassuming but nevertheless commanding in appearance,
without petty vanity, intensely serious but never histrionic in his seriousness,
imperious only when things or people impeded the performance of his duty. The
United States has never had a more faithful public servant. . . . I once asked a
Russian friend what the Russians thought of him. 'They look at him,' she
replied, 'and they say to themselves: There goes a man!' . . . In this, I think,
she spoke for us all."

NAME: W. Averell Harriman

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: W. Averell Harriman, right, with Stalin atop Lenin's tomb during
victory parade in 1945. (Library of Congress/From "Spanning the Century")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words



International    A2-7

IRAQ YIELDS ON INSPECTIONS

Iraq agreed to allow United Nations arms inspectors into a Government building
in Baghdad, ending a 21-day standoff and removing the diplomatic thorn that had
recently prompted the United States and its allies to consider military action.
A1

BUSH SAYS HUSSEIN 'CAVED IN'

President Bush said he was dissatisfied with Iraq's agreement to permit an arms
search at a ministry. But he called the Iraqi President a "bully" who finally
"caved in." A6

Iraqi television makes no mention of the accord with the U.N.  A6

A report says Iraq has regained much of its ability to export oil.  A7

SUBDUED, BAKER FLIES HOME

James Baker headed home, ending what might be his last overseas trip as
Secretary of State in the Bush Administration. He did not seem buoyed by reports
that he will take over the President's campaign.  A1

Few signals that Arabs are ready to compromise with Israel.  A7

U.N. SEEKS AIRDROP IN BOSNIA

After a dangerous and futile effort to deliver food by road to the besieged city
of Gorazde, United Nations relief officials in Bosnia said they would ask
Western nations to consider airdropping supplies.  A3

FILES ON SOUTH AFRICAN TORTURE

South Africa's most prominent independent pathologist accused the police of a
pattern of torturing and killing prisoners.  A5

ISLAM BUT NO ORDER IN KABUL

Movie theaters have been shut and liquor has been banned in the Afghan capital,
but the Muslim factions that took the city in April after a 14-year civil war
have not succeeded in governing peaceably.  A3

COWED BY THE SHINING PATH

The terror in a Peruvian shantytown started July 15, when President Fujimori
praised its self-defense patrol for standing up to guerrillas.  A5

RULING PARTY WINS IN JAPAN

Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party rebounded from its worst setback in
postwar history, winning more than half the seats in a parliamentary election.
A2

Sanabu Journal: Coptic Christians are victims of violence.  A4

Mass grave reported found in Zimbabwe.  A7

National    A8-13

FETAL TISSUE PLAN IS FAULTED

Memorandums by officials at the National Institutes of Health questioned whether
the Bush Administration's proposed fetal tissue bank could provide enough tissue
for most of the experiments scientists would like to do.  A1

HIGH COST OF SOFTWARE THEFT

People who would not steal a book or cheat on a test seem to have no qualms
about obtaining software illegally, even though Federal law is clear that in
almost all cases it is illegal to make copies of software. This thievery costs
software companies billions of dollars.  A1

YEAR OF THE CONFESSION

This seems to be the year of the political confessional, at least for the
Democrats, as Governor Clinton and Senator Gore bare their inner thoughts.  A1

GOOD TIME FOR DEMOCRATS

Reaping the rewards of the largest post-convention popularity surge on record,
Democratic officials say July is quickly becoming the strongest month in this
election season for raising money.  A10

GORE'S BOOK SCRUTINIZED

In the days since Senator Gore was nominated to be Governor Clinton's running
mate, his recent book on the environment has come under a new wave of scrutiny.
A11

Senator Gore was a student of TV's influence on elections.  A11

Vice President Quayle took the G.O.P. campaign to the races.  A10

WORKING WITH THE DISABLED

Under the Americans With Disabilities Act, employers must now give the disabled
the same opportunities as other workers, and many executives are concerned about
costs. But a handful of companies that employ a lot of disabled workers have
lessons to offer.  A8

CONTENTIOUS RACE IN MAINE

An heir of the founder of L.L. Bean, the company that is practically synonymous
with Maine, is promoting her conservative philosophy in her campaign for
Congress.  A8

ATLANTA'S OLYMPIC TASK

As millions watch the Olympics in Barcelona for the sheer pleasure of seeing
great athletes in action, officials in Atlanta, the next site of the games, are
looking for tips on everything from security to traffic.  A13

URBAN ILLS IN A SMALL CITY

Burlington, Vt., has drawn newcomers because it did not seem to have the ills of
urban America. But now drug arrests and a murder have shattered the city's
image.  A13

An aide disputed a report that Ronald Reagan might be indicted.  A8

A school board plans to punish students for antigay taunts.  A12

Man with H. I. V. challenges U. S. Entry ban.  A12

Metro Digest    B1

PARKS WHERE PEOPLE ARE

Urban parks like Gateway National Recreation Area in New York and New Jersey are
among the National Park Service's most popular recreation spots. But the agency
has never made such urban spaces a priority, and Federal financing is still
distributed in disproportionate amounts to the far bigger, yet more remote,
expanses in the West.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Arts/Entertainment    C15-18

A deal between Disney and Merchant-Ivory.  C15

A musical extravaganza at Expo '92.  C15

Theater: Carried away clowning around.  C15

Film: "Mom and Dad Save the World." C18

Music: "The Secret Marriage" at Glimmerglass Opera.  C15

Word and Image: Trying to shock.  B6

"Promise Not to Tell," a program on child abuse.  B6

Neil Sheehan on Vietnam.  C18

Sports    C1-14

DIEBEL GETS FIRST U.S. GOLD

Nelson Diebel became the first United States swimmer to win a gold medal in the
100-meter breast-stroke since the 1976 Olympics. The 21-year-old Diebel,
capturing the first gold medal for the United States at Barcelona, set an
Olympic record of 1 minute 1.50 seconds despite a sore shoulder.  C1.

SHEEHAN'S SURGE FORCES PLAYOFF

After a long rain delay, Patty Sheehan birdied the last two holes at the Oakmont
Country Club in Pennsylvania to force an 18-hole playoff with Julie Inkster
today for the United States Women's Open.  C3.

Olympics:

Barkley's elbow fouls U.S. rout.  C1

Strong Cuban start in baseball.  C6

U. S. basketball team awaits Croatia.  C6

Fu, at 13, leads divers.  C6

TV Sports C6

2 Americans advance in boxing.  C8

Last Olympics for Karolyi?  C8

Stunning reverse for Zmeskal.  C8

Even loss in ring is magical to Mandela.  C8

Shock in Jersey over a death in Barcelona.  C9

Thompson says she "choked." C9

Australian wins cycling gold.  C11

Baseball: Mets blanked again by Padres.  C5

Yanks end trip on losing note.  C5

Another milestone for Ryan.  C5

Braves' streak ended by Pirates.  C5

Column: Anderson on death at opening cermony.  C1

Cycling: Indurain wins Tour de France again.  C3

Features: Sidelines C12

Question Box C14

Obituaries    D8

Adm. Paul P. Blackburn Jr., Head of Seventh Fleet in Vietnam.

Mary Wells, pop singer.

Editorials/Op-Ed    A16-17

Editorials

Solving Europe's refugee crisis.
How your tax dollars arm felons.
Pickpocket parking.
David Anderson: TV time bomb.

Letters

John R. MacArthur: The other defeat in the gulf.

Laurence H. Tribe: Write Roe into law.

Deborah Linfield: How do I tell my daughter?

Robert Stone: Fiction's claim on fact.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Adm. Paul P. Blackburn Jr., 83, Head of Seventh Fleet in Vietnam

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 486 words


Paul P. Blackburn Jr., a retired vice admiral who commanded the Navy's Seventh
Fleet in the early months of its buildup in the Vietnam War, died Wednesday at
the Seabrook retirement center in Hilton Head, S.C. He was 83 years old.

He died of lymph cancer, his family said.

Admiral Blackburn took command of the fleet on March 1, 1965, as American forces
were building up after the Gulf of Tonkin episode in August 1964. He was in
charge of 125 ships, 650 aircraft and 65,000 troops in Asia and the Pacific.

For the start of a major bombing attack against North Vietnam in July 1965, he
was joined aboard the carrier Independence by Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
President Lyndon B. Johnson, with White House and Pentagon officials, helped
them pick the targets.

Vietnam Duty Cut Short

That September, Admiral Blackburn commanded from his flagship, the Oklahoma, a
guided-missile carrier, as naval guns pounded the shoreline. That cleared the
way for thousands of marines to make an amphibious landing on the Batangan
Peninsula southeast of Da Nang and drive Vietcong forces into the hands of South
Vietnamese ground units.

His Vietnam tenure was cut short when he was became ill and was temporarily
hospitalized. He was replaced as the fleet commander on Dec. 1, 1965.

Before Vietnam, Admiral Blackburn commanded naval forces on patrol off Taiwan in
1958 and 1959, when the Communist government on China's mainland was shelling
the islands of Quemoy and Matsu, which were controlled by the nationalist
government based on Taiwan.

Among his other posts and assignments were sea duty in the Middle East and
Persian Gulf, commander of the carrier Intrepid, chief of staff of the Naval Air
Force Atlantic Fleet, the Navy's office of the chief of Naval Operations,
commander of the Pacific Fleet's Carrier Division 3 and the Office of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in 1962-64.

World War II Veteran

A combat veteran of World War II, where he served in both the Atlantic and the
Pacific, as well as of Vietnam, he won decorations that included the Bronze
Star, two Legion of Merit awards and the Distinguished Service Medal.

He retired in 1969 as the chief of staff of the United States Strike Command at
McDill Air Force Base in Florida.

Born in Seattle, Admiral Blackburn grew up in Washington, D.C. His father was a
Navy officer who reached the rank of commodore.

Admiral Blackburn began his career at the Naval Academy in 1926. Later he also
graduated from the Air War College and National War College. His early service
was as an aviator from 1932-42.

Surviving are his wife of 61 years, the former Marian Alice Moulden; two sons,
Paul P. Blackburn 3d of Tokyo and W. Stewart Blackburn of Medomak, Me.; a
brother, John T. Blackburn of Jacksonville, Fla.; three granddaughters, and one
great-granddaughter.

NAME: Paul P. Blackburn Jr.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul P. Blackburn Jr. (1965)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
The Television Time Bomb

BYLINE: By DAVID C. ANDERSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


For the toddlers, it's gangs of cartoon mice dynamiting a menacing cat.
Elementary schoolers sit rapt while superheroes wield special powers to dispatch
evil. And by the time they're in junior high, American kids regularly witness
barroom fistfights, knifepoint rapes, drug-deal shootouts and terrorist attacks.

All on television, of course. But for years parents have worried about the
effects of such violence, fanciful as it may be, on developing minds. Now a
Seattle psychiatrist, Brandon Centerwall, offers a theory that, if corroborated
by other researchers, suggests good reason for worry.

In a recent issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association, Dr.
Centerwall describes how he sought to measure the relationship between
television and violence by comparing the United States with South Africa, where
an affluent Westernized white population remained without TV programming until
1975.

In the U.S., Dr. Centerwall writes, the homicide rate among white Americans
nearly doubled between the introduction of television in the 1950's and 1975.
The biggest surge in American homicides occurred after 1965, just as the first
generation of children to grow up with television reached adolescence.

The psychiatrist asserts that he considered the effects of age distribution,
urbanization, economic conditions, alcohol consumption, capital punishment,
civil unrest and the availability of firearms. Yet "none provided a viable
alternative explanation for the observed homicide trends."

Thinking that the American civil rights movement or the Vietnam War might have
had some effect, he looked at similar figures for Canada. It introduced
television at the same time the U.S. did but never had a big civil rights
problem and didn't send troops to Vietnam. The Canadian homicide and TV use
statistics rose in striking parallel with those for the U.S. The homicide
figures for white South Africans, meanwhile, remained flat between 1950 and
1975.

But by 1987, as South Africa's first television generation came of age, the
homicide rate had more than doubled. In the U.S. and Canada, meanwhile, homicide
rates among whites between 1974 and 1987 remained relatively stable.

Dr. Centerwall concludes that long-term childhood exposure to television is a
causal factor behind half of the homicides committed in the United States, or
about 10,000 homicides annually.

That's a sobering conclusion, yet Dr. Centerwall suggests possible responses
that wouldn't raise any censorship issues: educating pediatricians and parents
about the problem, rating TV shows for violence and requiring that all new TV
sets be equipped with time-channel locks that would let parents block reception
of violent shows in advance. The problem also argues for more day care and
after-school programs, which would allow working parents to make less use of TV
as a baby sitter.

Those are useful ideas in any case. However much television violence may serve
the needs of the entertainment industry, it fully warrants treatment as an issue
for public health and social policy, and a special challenge for parents.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Books of The Times;
Sheehan Turns to Peace in Vietnam

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 994 words



After the War Was Over
Hanoi and Saigon
By Neil Sheehan
Illustrated. 131 pages. Random House. $17.

You don't know quite what to expect at the opening of Neil Sheehan's
enlightening report, "After the War Was Over: Hanoi and Saigon," when he
describes landing at Noi Bai Airport in Hanoi in 1989.

In his previous writings, Mr. Sheehan has described himself as an avid supporter
of United States policy in Vietnam when he first went there in 1962 as a
25-year-old reporter for United Press International. But in time he grew
disillusioned with what he came to see as the major tragedy of his generation,
so much so that in 1971, when he was working for The New York Times, he obtained
the official secret archive of the war known as the Pentagon Papers.

Between 1971 and 1989 he wrote "A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and America
in Vietnam," an award-winning account of the war as seen through the eyes of the
battle commander whom Mr. Sheehan regarded as the personification of the
American venture in Vietnam. After "A Bright Shining Lie" was published, Mr.
Sheehan felt at peace with himself and was eager to return to Vietnam with his
wife, the journalist Susan Sheehan, and see the country that had so long been
the object of his obsessions, now that it was also at peace.

Yet one's curiosity over what his return will be like is resolved with dramatic
suddenness. Almost the first person he and his wife got to see was Gen. Vo
Nguyen Giap, and the very occurrence of their meeting with the 79-year-old
victor of Dien Bien Phu as well as the content of their conversation with him
sets the tone for what is to come in Mr. Sheehan's mesmerizing report.

First, there is the surprising fact of General Giap's accessibility. This
indicated the willingness of the Vietnamese to show the Sheehans whatever they
wished to see, whether it was a battle site, a factory or an individual and
whether what they saw reflected positively or negatively on the Vietnamese
struggle to consolidate their victory in the war.

Then there is the combination of pride and humility displayed by this living
icon of Vietnamese history. In 1982, General Giap was forced out of the
Politburo, the executive body of the Vietnamese Communist Party, after clashing
with Le Duan, the Brezhnev-like general secretary of the party who has been
blamed for the economic mistakes and political dogmatism of the first decade
after American troops left. Yet even though General Giap suffered the
humiliation of being forced to stand behind the editor of the party newspaper on
formal occasions when protocol ruled, "there was a limit to how much such
slights could hurt this man," Mr. Sheehan writes. "He knew who he was and what
he had done, and no one could take that away from him."

Similarly, many of the people whom the Sheehans interviewed seem indifferent to
matters of pride or humiliation. Among the most interesting of these is Nguyen
Van Linh, the present general secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party, who
survived 12 years of French prisons, 30 years of war and manhunts in the South,
and a decade of internecine political struggle after the Communist victory in
1975 before he eventually took over the leadership of his country in 1985 and
started it down a new path toward partial capitalism after his predecessor, Le
Duan, had failed to build the ideal Communist society. There is also Ly Tong Ba,
a general in command of a South Vietnamese infantry division when the Government
of President Le Duc Thieu finally fell in 1975, who fully expected to be
executed by the Communists but who survived 12 years of prison and
"re-education."

But what impresses the reader most about General Giap's demeanor is his lack of
bitterness or animosity, particularly toward Americans. This too was reflected
everywhere the Sheehans went in Vietnam. People even looked ahead to a time when
the American economic boycott would end and diplomatic relations would resume.
Mr. Sheehan writes that the Vietnamese "see an American diplomatic and business
presence as a political counterpoise to China and an economic counterpoise to
Japan."

The Communists did not impose the much-feared blood bath on their defeated
opponents. In fact, the people who suffered the most, many of them expelled from
the country and perishing at sea as boat people, were the Chinese minority in
Vietnam, who were feared as a potential fifth column for Beijing. And this can
be seen as the final paradox of America's involvement in the war, considering
that its policy was based on an assumption that if South Vietnam was defeated by
the North, it would be the first of a series of dominoes toppling over in the
path of a monolithic Communist juggernaut led by China.

Mr. Sheehan's book, portions of which originally appeared in different form in
The New Yorker, finally adds up to a view of the struggle with the United States
from the enemy's perspective. Mr. Sheehan reports that back in 1963, Ho Chi Minh
predicted that Americans would behave differently from the French. "Neither you
nor I knows the Americans well," Ho told a visiting Polish diplomat, "but what
we do know of them, what we have read and heard about them, suggests that they
are more practical and clearsighted than other capitalist nations. They will not
pour their resources into Vietnam endlessly. One day they will take pencil in
hand and begin figuring. Once they really begin to analyze our ideas seriously,
they will come to the conclusion that it is possible and even worthwhile to live
in peace with us."

But Ho turned out to be wrong. As Mr. Sheehan writes, the Americans proved
different from the French only in the degree of arrogance "in the hubris of our
moment in the sun." So the Vietnamese rolled up their sleeves and fought the
American forces until they left. It was, as Mr. Sheehan's report makes
luminously clear, simply another task in their centuries-old struggle for
independence.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 28, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A book review yesterday about "After the War Was Over: Hanoi and Saigon," by
Neil Sheehan, referred incorrectly in some editions to the presidency of South
Vietnam. The President in office when the country fell to the Communists was
Gen. Duong Van Minh. His predecessor, who resigned nine days earlier, was Nguyen
Van Thieu, not Le Duc Thieu.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Neil Sheehan (Nancy Crampton/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Philippines' Leader Wants Legalization Of Communist Party

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: MANILA, July 27


President Fidel V. Ramos asked the Philippine Congress today to repeal a
35-year-old law that makes the Communist Party illegal, a politically symbolic
move aimed at demonstrating his Government's resolve to settle Asia's remaining
Marxist insurgency peacefully.

In his state of the nation address at the opening session of Congress, Mr. Ramos
also ordered a review of the cases of hundreds of political prisoners to
determine whether they can be released either by posting bail or through
presidential pardon.

Mr. Ramos, a retired general who was formerly chief of the armed forces, said
repealing the antisubversion law banning the Communist Party would allow it "to
compete openly, freely and peacefully in the political, economic and social
arena instead of following the path of armed struggle."

But lawyers say that making the party legal would not prevent members from being
arrested on other charges, including rebellion, murder and illegal possession of
firearms.

The proposal was part of a package of measures intended to resolve a rebellion
that has persisted for more than 20 years. Three weeks ago, shortly after he
assumed the presidency, Mr.  Ramos named three representatives, including the
founder of the Communist New People's Army, to open negotiations that could lead
to a political settlement with Marxist insurgents. But Communist leaders have
dismissed the Ramos initiatives, saying they doubt the sincerity of a man who
was once a staunch cold warrior. The West Point-educated President is a veteran
of both the Korean and Vietnam wars.

In 1986, as army Chief of Staff, he opposed the Government's decision to release
Communist leaders and to discuss peace with the insurgents. But since then, the
Communists have lost much ground, largely because of internal disputes. The
Government estimates that there are 16,000 Marxist guerrillas, compared with
25,000 six years ago.

The military hopes that legalizing the Communist Party will increase internal
dissension and bring to the surface disgruntled members who prefer parliamentary
opposition to warfare.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 58 words


A book review yesterday about "After the War Was Over: Hanoi and Saigon," by
Neil Sheehan, referred incorrectly in some editions to the presidency of South
Vietnam. The President in office when the country fell to the Communists was
Gen. Duong Van Minh. His predecessor, who resigned nine days earlier, was Nguyen
Van Thieu, not Le Duc Thieu.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
BRITISH PETROLEUM TO INVEST MORE IN VIETNAM OIL SEARCH

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 91 words


The British Petroleum Company P.L.C., which by the end of 1992 will have spent
$90 million looking for oil in Vietnam, expects to spend an additional $150
million on its next phase of exploration there, a company official said. John
Browne, managing director and chief executive officer of London-based BP
Exploration, said British Petroleum could eventually spend a total $2 billion in
Vietnam if it struck oil. He said Vietnam had encouraging oil potential, despite
a total of 18 dry wells drilled by foreign companies since the late 1980's.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Shifts to a New Turf;
Clinton Challenges Bush on His Strong Suit, Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


For Gov. Bill Clinton, this week's tussle with President Bush and the White
House over the crisis in the former Yugoslavian republics represents a major
test of his capacity to frame and articulate foreign policy.

Widely unpopular with the American electorate, unable to regain the offensive on
economic policy, Mr. Bush retains, because of his lengthy foreign-affairs
experience and the American victory in the Persian Gulf war, among other things,
a good deal of credibility on security matters and on foreign policy questions
in general.

His strategists see that as his trump card in the 1992 elections, a way to
distinguish himself sharply from a Democratic nominee who has spent his entire
public career in Little Rock, Ark.

After Mr. Clinton issued a statement criticizing Mr. Bush for failing to provide
adequate leadership on the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and urging the United States to seek United Nations authorization for selective
bombing of Serbian targets in Bosnia, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House
spokesman, called the proposal "reckless" and said Mr. Clinton and his running
mate, Senator Al Gore, "are a long way from being qualified to lead the
country."

Today, that brought return fire from Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore and others that made
it clear the Democrats had no intention of ceding foreign-policy primacy to the
Republicans. The question is, can Mr. Clinton fight Mr. Bush at least to a
standstill on ground where the President made his reputation?  Will the voters
believe him when he proposes alternative policies abroad?

Still divided along hawk-and-dove fault lines that first emerged in the Vietnam
War, fearful of seeming soft on Communism and other foes of the United States,
reluctant to revive memories of the American hostages taken in Iran in the
Carter Administration, Mr. Clinton's party has for the most part refrained from
challenging Ronald Reagan's and Mr. Bush's foreign policies too boldly in recent
elections.

"Experience isn't judgment, and we intend to question the President's judgment
when it is appropriate," said George Stephanopoulos, Mr. Clinton's
communications director. "No matter how hard the White House tries, this
election is going to be about the economy, because that is what most people care
most about. But Bill Clinton will cede no ground on foreign policy."

As if to symbolize the Democrats' determination not to let Mr. Bush do to Mr.
Clinton what he did to former Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts four
years ago, former President Jimmy Carter joined Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore in a
carefully coordinated counterattack. The campaign also gave wide distribution to
a compendium of quotations purporting to show that leading Republicans,
including Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, as well as European leaders, had called
for actions similar to those Mr. Clinton had advocated.

The Clinton statement, issued Sunday night, was approved by Mr. Clinton and Mr.
Gore after a telephone conversation over the weekend, campaign officials said.
Nancy Soderberg, the foreign policy director at the campaign's Little Rock
headquarters, said she and three other specialists drafted it -- Anthony Lake
and Samuel R. Berger, the two senior foreign policy advisers, and Leon Fuerth,
Mr. Gore's top foreign policy aide on Capitol Hill.

Team Behind Position

Ms. Soderberg, who worked on foreign policy for Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts and in the 1984 and 1988 Democratic Presidential campaigns before
joining Mr. Clinton last month, is the top paid, full-time foreign-affairs
official. Mr. Lake, who teaches at Mount Holyoke College and raises cattle on a
farm in western Massachusetts, and Mr. Berger, a lawyer in the Washington firm
of Hogan and Hartson, worked together on the State Department policy planning
staff in the Carter administration. They are volunteers.

The general-election campaign is only just beginning, but in Washington
political and policy circles, Mr. Lake is often described as a likely national
security adviser in a Clinton White House. Another candidate for that job, it is
said, is Michael Mandelbaum, who teaches at Johns Hopkins University's School of
Advanced International Studies and has known Mr. Clinton since both were
studying in England, he at Cambridge and Mr. Clinton at Oxford.

Mr. Clinton spoke out on Bosnia several times before issuing the statement that
drew the fire of the Bush camp, often taking a more aggressive posture than the
President. In an interview with The New York Times on June 25, for example, he
said he would be willing to take part in a multilateral military force that
would "shoot its way into" the Sarajevo airport, if necessary, to make it safe
enough for a steady airlift of relief supplies.

Mr. Mandelbaum, an expert on Eastern Europe and the Middle East, said in an
interview that the situation in Bosnia was worth taking a strong stand on
because "it is is an archetype for the rest of the world, an example of the
kinds of very difficult problems that we are going to face more often as the old
empires break up and nationalism and ethnicity come to the fore."

According to several members of the the Governor's advisory team, he is prepared
to agree with Mr. Bush, as he did on the Gulf war and on Iraq last weekend, when
he thinks the President is on the right track. But the aides predicted
continuing attacks from Mr. Clinton on some of Mr. Bush's other policies,
including the military budget, which he considers too big, especially with
regard to troop levels in Europe and "Star Wars," or the Strategic Defense
Initiative.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, who is one of the people on Capitol
Hill whom Mr. Clinton regularly consults, conceded that "every time Clinton
makes a foreign-policy statement, they are going to try to knock him down, which
will have the effect of making foreign policy a much larger part of the
campaign."

"But it is not going to be as easy as they think," Mr. Hamilton said. "Clinton
has no experience in foreign policy, but Bush has his vulnerabilities, too --
some real successes, but some failures as well, like his inept handling of
Saddam Hussen before the war, his failed trips to Tokyo on trade and Rio on the
environment. There's no need whatever for Bill Clinton to hang back."

The end of the cold war has made it easier for Mr. Clinton to take strong stands
without offending one faction or another in his party. Mr. Lake remarked that
"there is a lot more common ground than there used to be, in the days of the
ideological wars in the party."

Mr. Lake added: "In the 1970's and the 1980's, we refought the Vietnam War
within the party every four years, and every position a candidate took was a
victory for either the conservative wing or the liberal wing. No more."

In 1972, Mr. Berger worked for George McGovern, a liberal, and Mr. Lake for
Edmund S. Muskie, a centrist.  Other top advisers come from the Progressive
Policy Institute, the research arm of the Democratic Leadership Council, which
has inherited the hawkish tradition of the late Senator Henry M. Jackson.

However heterogenous they may be in ideological terms, the Clinton
foreign-policy advisers share several characteristics: they are mostly young,
mostly male, mostly white, mostly educated at Ivy League universities and almost
entirely from outside Mr. Clinton's home state.

Mr. Lake, considered by many to be the dominant figure, cut his diplomatic teeth
as a career officer in Vietnam, where he was part of an elite group that also
included Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Clinton's Foreign Policy Team"

Warren Chrisopher

Deputy Secretary ofState in the Carter Administration . . . Headed Clinton's
search for a Vice-Presidential nominee . . . Los Angeles lawyer.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton

Democrat of Indiana, headed the House committee investigating the Iran-contra
affair in 1986.

Anthony Lake

State Department director of policy planning in the Carter Administration . . .
Now on the faculty of Mount Holyoke College in Massachusetts.

Samuel R. Berger

State Department deputy director of policy planning in the Carter Administration
. . . Now a lawyer in Washington.

Michael Mandelbaum

Professor of American foreign policy at Johns Hopkins University . . . Director
of East-West studies at the Council on Foreign Relations.

Nancy Soderberg

Senior foreign policy aide to Senator Edward M. Kennedy before joining the
Clinton campaign . . . Deputy director of foreign policy for the Dukakis
campaign in 1988.

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail;
'SORRY,' P.O.W. GROUP TELLS BUSH

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 85 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


An organization of P.O.W.-M.I.A. families apologized to President Bush today for
the heckling he received at its meeting last week and told him he was justified
in responding as he did. "I am writing to express our deepest apologies," Ann
Mills Griffiths, executive director of the League of Families of American
Prisoners of Missing in Southeast Asia, told Mr. Bush.

When hecklers interrupted his speech before the group on Friday, the President
said, "Would you please shut up and sit down?"

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE B.C.C.I. Scandal;
Charm for Plebeians and Patricians

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 29


How could a man like Clark M. Clifford with an illustrious career that hinged on
his probity and judgment get into so much trouble?

It was not for the fame and the glory. This is someone who counseled every
Democratic President since Harry S. Truman, the only one present at the creation
of United States policy against the Soviet Union who stayed around long enough
to watch Communism collapse. He played poker with Winston Churchill on the train
to Fulton, Mo., for Churchill's Iron Curtain speech. He masterminded Truman's
come-from-behind victory over Thomas E. Dewey in the 1948 election. He was John
F. Kennedy's personal lawyer and Lyndon B. Johnson's Secretary of Defense. He
advised Edmund S. Muskie in the 1972 campaign and went on special diplomatic
missions for Jimmy Carter. And he was still prominent enough in 1989 for Speaker
of the House Jim Wright to retain him when Mr. Wright was being investigated by
the House Ethics Committee.

A Millionaire Many Times Over

It was not for the money. Over the years, Mr. Clifford's legal clients included
corporate giants like Standard Oil, Du Pont and Phillips Petroleum, like A.T.&
T., RCA, T.W.A. and ABC. In the 1960's, he was said to be the first Washington
lawyer to earn $1 million in a year. By the 1980's, he was a millionaire many
times over.

And he certainly did not get into trouble because he had grown so old he had
lost his marbles. He displayed discipline and acuity when he testified last fall
before the House Banking Committee, two months before his 85th birthday. For an
hour and 20 minutes, he gave an extemporaneous narrative of his life and
activities, only rarely referring to notes, sitting ramrod straight, his
baritone voice as true as ever. And then he fielded questions for another five
hours or so, calling the lawmakers by name and never once stumbling.

Mr. Clifford's explanation for his legal problems is that he was duped by the
Bank of Credit and Commerce International -- that he had no idea it owned the
controlling stock in the Washington bank he ran, that it had no say in how the
Washington bank was operated and that the millions of dollars he borrowed from
B.C.C.I. and the millions he earned from selling stock in the Washington bank
were above board and justified.

A New Career at 85

Why, at the age when most men are dead or at least retired, did he get into
banking in the first place? For the challenge, he told the Banking Committee: "I
was well. I was strong. I was vigorous. I didn't want to retire. I didn't want
to just sit on the porch and rock and wait to die."

Some of Mr. Clifford's admirers blame his law partner and protege, Robert A.
Altman, who is 45 years old and who was indicted along with Mr. Clifford today.
Mr. Altman is as flashy and aggressive as Mr. Clifford is polished and urbane.
But there is little evidence that Mr. Altman and Mr. Clifford were anything
except equal partners or that Mr. Altman did anything behind Mr. Clifford's
back.

The prevailing view in Washington legal and political circles is that, at rock
bottom, Mr. Clifford's legal troubles are the result of hubris. Neither his
friends nor his enemies think he is crooked. They just think that after all the
years of cutting deals, of wielding influence, of fixing things quietly for his
clients, whether Presidents or corporations, perhaps Mr. Clifford came to think
that the normal rules did not apply to him.

A Powerful Charm

Whether that is the case, there is little doubt that lubrication and persuasion
were his specialties, style and charm his greatest strengths.

At times, the country benefited from those talents. In his memoirs, "Counsel to
the President," which was published last year by Random House, Mr. Clifford
describes how he charmed Churchill and helped persuade Truman to recognize the
new state of Israel over the objection of Secretary of State George C. Marshall.
He organized the transition between the Eisenhower and Kennedy Administrations.
He was one of the very few who could talk turkey with Lyndon Johnson about
Vietnam.

In a review of the memoirs in The New York Times Book Review, Roger Morris
described Mr. Clifford's enormous skill in dealing with people. "He was," Mr.
Morris wrote, "plebeian enough to play a gritty hand of poker with Harry and the
boys, patrician enough to match moves with Washington's older Eastern elite, the
Harrimans and Achesons, the McCloys and Lovetts."

Use His Experience

But Mr. Clifford served less than six years altogether in the Government. For
the most part, he was a bellwether for the ever-growing flock of Washington
lawyers who briefly answer the call to public service and then use the
experience to enrich themselves handsomely.

So working with a shady group of Middle Eastern financiers, borrowing money from
a bank chartered in Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands and earning as much as $10
million on a stock deal were not completely out of character.

Speaking of his legal problems, Mr. Clifford told the Banking Committee last
fall, "I would have given anything if I could have avoided what I've gone
through."

But of course he cannot avoid it now. So Clark McAdams Clifford, at the age of
85, who described Washington in his memoirs as "the most majestic and
exhilarating place on earth," must now defend his reputation, his stock in
trade, against charges of corruption.

"I have a choice of either seeming stupid or venal," he told an interviewer last
year, humbled to preferring the former.

NAME: Clark M. Clifford

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Clark M. Clifford helped President Harry S. Truman achieve an
upset victory over Gov. Thomas E. Dewey in the 1948 Presidential election. Mr.
Clifford and President Truman at Key West, Fla., in 1949. (U.S. Navy)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
To Clinton, at Crest of Popularity, Smiling Is Easy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., July 31


In Bill Clinton's profession, smiling is an essential job skill and an ingrained
habit.

Mr. Clinton's smile is one of the best, even by the demanding standards of his
line of work. It runs an unusually varied gamut, from a full-beam grin that
denotes honest fun, to a slightly quizzical, open-jawed look of modesty, to a
small, seductive curve delivered with a shy glance from under half-lowered
eyelids, with the lower lip lightly bitten.

Riding the crest of his own popularity, Mr. Clinton campaigns most days from
early in the morning until late at night, and during most of that time, he is
smiling. (He alternates greetings as he goes down the line: "Hi. Hello. Hi.
Hello. Hi. Hello.") He smiles as he dandles more babies than a portrait
photographer. ("Aw, that's a beautiful baby," he says.)

He smiles in the face of adversity, as he did in La Grange, Ill., on Tuesday,
when a young man repeatedly addressed him as "Slick Willie," and in New Orleans
on Wednesday, when he cheerfully suggested that a heckler at his evening speech
shut up.

This morning, an easy day with only one public event here in the morning and a
speech before the National Bar Association in St. Louis in the evening, Mr.
Clinton, under the lights and lenses of the cameras, played at playing
basketball with a group of neighborhood children at the North Little Rock
Community Center. He was more game than his game was good; he hit only 4 of 11
shots, repeatedly forgot to dribble the ball and displayed the reaction time of,
well, a large middle-aged man. But he kept smiling.

In most politicians, most of the time, such relentless beaming would seem false,
particularly in the case of a politician in trouble (such as Mr. Clinton was
during the dark days of spring), when the line between a frozen smile and the
rictus of rigor mortis is easily crossed. The interesting thing about Mr.
Clinton's sunniness is how appropriate it looks.

Easy to Stay Cheerful

The days since the end of the convention that nominated him as the Democratic
choice for President, beginning his great, though possibly evanescent, rise in
the polls, have been the summer of Mr. Clinton's content. He seems to be having
the time of his life, and no wonder. He is on a roll of historical proportions,
and he is spending his days doing what true politicians truly love: talking at
length to admiring crowds.

It is hard to say exactly how much Mr. Clinton talks in a given day, but it is a
lot. Four half-hour speeches, plus four 15-minute segments of chatting his way
through the crowd would give him (at an average speed of 90 words per minute),
16,200 words right there, and that does not count all the talk that goes into
lesser events of the day, the interviews and news conferences and fund-raisers.
The total for a full 12-hour day of campaigning must run to a minimum of 40,000
words, or about half the length of a modest book.

Yet Mr. Clinton, in his current ebullience, seems to find this hardly enough. In
the town-meeting-style events favored by the candidate, he often takes questions
for 40 or 50 minutes, and he generally answers each one with a mini-speech of
enough length and depth that his questioners generally get tired and sit down
well before the end of his answers to their queries.

There is something about the town meetings that suggests a game -- "Ask Mr.
Policyman" it might be called -- that Mr. Clinton genuinely enjoys, perhaps
because he always wins. He sits with easy confidence in the middle of whatever
group his campaign has gathered, apparently secure in the knowledge that he can
pull, from the storage files of his mind, enough bits and pieces of past
speeches, policy papers and legislation to handle almost any question.

But it is more than a mere grasp of policy that Mr. Clinton displays in this
kind of setting. He seems to have, these days at least, a winner's confidence
that he can talk his way through whatever the moment brings. When, this morning,
a teen-ager asked him to discuss his reaction to "all those allegations about
your wife" that had come up earlier in the campaign, Mr. Clinton chuckled and
said easily, "Oh, I though it was kinda overdone." Then he moved seamlessly into
the thought that "we can spend too much time looking at yesterday when we ought
to be looking at tomorrow."

Mr. Clinton's desire to talk even encompasses his previous tormenters, the
reporters. Very late Tuesday night, after a 16-hour day, the candidate wandered
back into the press section of his campaign plane for a chat. He started on
politics, moved to varied matters of policy -- health care, abortion, the
economy, industrial planning, the regulation of breast implants, to cite a few
-- and went on to discuss his current favorites among books and movies, the
state of the American psyche ("very fragile"), his daughter, Chelsea, and her
progress at language camp, and other thoughts as they came up in questions or in
his mind.

He was offhandedly candid about subjects that would more safely be avoided. He
told of an encounter with an adolescent boy at a recent speech. The youth, he
said, told him that his father had fought in Vietnam and suggested that he
doubted Mr. Clinton's fitness for the Presidency because of his successful
efforts to avoid service in the war.

"I said to him, 'I deeply respect what your father did, and I applaud it, but
you don't know what you're talking about, and you can't know, 'cause you weren't
there, and I hope you never have to learn.' "

The following night, Mr. Clinton made another appearance in the back of the
plane, this time after a 16-hour day chasing votes in Louisiana. A reporter
handed him a copy of the latest issue of "Weekly World News," the front page of
which was dominated by a "world exclusive photo" of Mr. Clinton shaking hands
with a slit-eyed creature the publication claimed was a visitor, and Clinton
supporter, from another planet.

Laughing, the candidate examined the front page, and said, "I want you to know,
I'm broadening my base." He added, "I promised you an inclusive Administration
and this means it." Poking mild fun at his own rhetoric, he said, "I mean, we
are all one family, right?"

A reporter mockingly accused Mr. Clinton of "intergalactic pandering" to secure
the alien vote.

"Yes, I promised them I'd keep the space station," Mr. Clinton said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton playing basketball yesterday with neighborhood
youths in the Midnight Basketball League at the North Little Rock Community
Center. He hit four shots out of 11. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

'People's Admiral' Is Buffeted in Storm Over Ethics

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words

DATELINE: PENSACOLA, Fla., July 30


Two years ago the Navy thought it had picked the ideal chief of training and
education, Vice Adm. John H. Fetterman Jr., a former naval inspector general
with a reputation for independence and creativity.

Soon after taking command here, Admiral Fetterman developed an experimental
program to help change entrenched attitudes in the Navy about women, race and
crime. Senior Navy leaders hailed what was called the "core values" program, and
Admiral Fetterman came to be respected as one of the foremost advocates of
promoting social justice in the Navy.

But last week the Navy abruptly decided it no longer had the right man, forcing
Admiral Fetterman to retire after superiors questioned his handling of an
investigation into the personal conduct of a staff aide who stands accused of
making homosexual advances toward other enlisted men. The admiral denies these
charges.

Admiral Fetterman's efforts to instill a new set of stronger ethics in the Navy,
and the sudden disintegration of his 37-year career, offer an intimate picture
of the Navy in turmoil and transition.

The Wake of a Storm

"I'm caught up in my total loyalty and dedication to a system I believe in, yet
the breath's been knocked out of me," the 59-year-old admiral said during a
two-hour interview here, his voice taut with emotion.

The Fetterman case did not involve sexual harassment of women, the issue that
has rocked the Navy since the disclosure that 26 women were mauled and molested
at a convention held by a group of current and former Navy and Marine pilots,
called the Tailhook Association, in Las Vegas last year. But he was apparently
caught in the wake of the storm produced by the Tailhook scandal, and in the
resulting pressures from Congress and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to deal more
aggressively with unacceptable behavior.

Tensions in the Navy are high and morale is low. Navy Secretary H. Lawrence
Garrett resigned last month. The Navy relieved five officers of their commands
in San Diego and canceled the promotions of two senior admirals, because of
their involvement in unrelated incidents of sexual harassment.

In the end, Admiral Fetterman was caught in that storm, pushed out for actions
that at another time might have brought a private rebuke, but in the current
atmosphere of heightened sensitivty was considered an offense serious enough to
warrant dismissal from his post.

A Swashbuckling Tradition

An account of Admiral Fetterman's experiences, while capturing the force of the
current upheavals, also tells a subtler story of a military service trying to
change a 200-year swashbuckling tradition that glorified the exploits of strong
men and demeaned the role of women, and remains adamantly hostile to gay men and
lesbians.

The original inspiration for the core values program, Admiral Fetterman said,
was the Navy's belief that each year society was delivering thousands of
recruits who "had skewed values."

In a five-hour course last May the program's first students, naval aviator
candidates, analyzed real-life case studies in sexual harassment, racial bias,
domestic violence and crime.

To his friends and colleagues, the program was consistent with an officer they
considered unusually open minded for the Navy. "He's a people's admiral who's
always looked out for the little guy," said Rear Adm. Leonard N. Oden, head of
the Navy's boot camp in Orlando, Fla., where Admiral Fetterman championed the
integration of women into the service.

Admiral Fetterman's supporters say his punishment -- a three-star officer, he's
being retired at two stars with a letter of censure -- far exceeds an offense
that the admiral denies he committed.

"It's all a reaction to political pressure in an election year," said Vice Adm.
Richard M. Dunleavy, the former head of naval aviation whose retirement in June
as a three-star officer is in jeopardy because of his handling of behavior at
the Tailhook convention.

But the naval inspector general found that Admiral Fetterman failed to review
impartially the case involving his aide, who is a close family friend, and erred
by not referring the matter immediately to the Naval Investigative Service,
which usually handles accusations of homosexuality. The Pentagon prohibits gay
men and lesbians from serving in the armed forces.

Admiral Fetterman's downfall is the tale of a man caught between conflicting
loyalties to the Navy and to its people, whose lives and careers he sought to
enhance. It is about a man who tried to balance compassion for an individual in
trouble with respect for duty, but who naively believed he could walk that
tightrope despite the explosive issue of homosexuality and the appearance of
playing favorites with a staff aide.

Admiral Fetterman's troubles began last Dec. 10 when he learned that his
executive secretary, a chief petty officer, had been accused of making
homosexual advances toward another enlisted man on the admiral's staff.

Worried that a standard response, an inquiry by the Naval Investigative Service,
could take weeks, Admiral Fetterman ordered the aide's supervising officer to
investigate. The admiral said he was concerned about his aide after the
accusations were made, and asked his chaplain to talk to the man.

On Jan. 21 the supervising officer, Comdr. Wayne Hurst, requested a military
equivalent of a grand jury proceeding after he learned that a complaint of
homosexuality had been made against the aide in 1989, but had not been proven. A
similar, unproven complaint was made in 1987.

Court-Martial Overruled

On Feb. 28 the inquiry recommended that the aide be court-martialed, but
Commander Hurst overruled the recommendation and instead ordered a reprimand and
alcohol counseling for the aide.

Admiral Fetterman said he concurred without reviewing the case because of the
Navy's tradition of trusting a commanding officer's judgment, and Commander
Hurst's conclusion that alcohol, not homosexuality, was to blame.

On April 14 an anonymous caller telephoned the Pentagon inspector general's
office to complain about Admiral Fetterman's handling of the matter. An ensuing
inquiry by the naval inspector general determined that Admiral Fetterman failed
to review the case impartially and refer it to the investigative service.

Last Wednesday, Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, the chief of naval operations,
temporarily relieved Admiral Fetterman pending a special inquiry into the case.
The next day Admiral Fetterman asked to be retired.

Anger and Frustration

"I could never see myself getting back into the field, no matter what," said the
admiral, who added that he did not want to drag the Navy through another painful
controversy.

Here in Pensacola, a Navy town since 1826, residents and Navy officials have
vented anger and frustration over Admiral Fetterman's treatment.

The Mayor and Chamber of Commerce have issued proclamations in support of the
admiral, who says he has received more than 800 phone calls, telegrams and
letters from friends, former shipmates and Navy personnel.

"He always tried to do the reasonable thing when applying strict rules and
regulations," said Capt. Jack Ensch, a Vietnam War veteran who was Admiral
Fetterman's inspector general here. "Right now, the Navy's hemorrhaging
internally, and I'm afraid we'll end up with a Navy with muscles and bones, but
no heart."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I'm caught up in my total loyalty and dedication to a system I
believe in, yet the breath's been knocked out of me," said Vice Adm. John H.
Fetterman Jr. Two years ago, the Navy picked him as the ideal chief of training
and education. Last week, the Navy forced him to retire. (Alan S. Weiner for The
New York Times

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Susan Sontag Finds Romance

BYLINE: By Leslie Garis;  Leslie Garis is a frequent contributer to this
magazine on literary subjects.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4873 words


As soon as Susan Sontag delivered the last section of her new novel, "The
Volcano Lover," to the offices of her publisher, she felt bereft. "It was like
taking a beloved person to the airport and returning to an empty house," she
says softly, intensely, during a recent interview in her New York apartment. "I
miss the people. I miss the world."

The principal characters -- although there are many others -- are Sir William
Hamilton, the 18th-century English minister to the Court of Naples; his wife,
Emma, and Horatio Lord Nelson, England's most revered naval hero, whose love
affair with Emma became as famous as his impressive victories over Napoleon.
Under the title (which refers to Hamilton's obsession with Mount Vesuvius),
Sontag has appended the words, "A Romance."

A romance by the author of "Against Interpretation," "Styles of Radical Will,"
"Death Kit" and "AIDS and Its Metaphors"? A romance by the intellectual champion
of modernism; the eloquent admirer of Roland Barthes, Elias Canetti, Antonin
Artaud?

"In order to find the courage to write this book, it helped me to find a label
that allowed me to go over the top," she explains. "The word 'romance' was like
a smile. Also, the novel becomes such a self-conscious enterprise for people who
read a lot. You want to do something that takes into account all the options you
have in fiction. Yet you don't want to be writing about fiction, but making
fiction. So I sprang myself from fictional self-consciousness by saying, It's a
novel -- it's more than a novel -- it's a romance!" She opens her arms and
laughs un-self-consciously. "And I fell into the book like Alice in Wonderland.
For three years, I worked 12 hours a day in a delirium of pleasure. This novel
is really a turning point for me."

At 59, she has already had a remarkable career. Although she has written
fiction, two plays and four films, she is primarily known for her learned and
startling essays. Dealing from a seemingly limitless store of knowledge, she has
examined the 20th century from widely divergent points of reference, like
literature, painting, illness, photography, philosophy, pornography, film,
sociology, anthropology, communism and fascism. Having lived for long periods in
France and Italy, conversant in three languages (translated into 23), she is a
true polymath internationalist.

Carlos Fuentes, the Mexican novelist and man of letters, and another writer who
straddles many cultures, compares her to Erasmus, the greatest humanist of the
Renaissance: "This is one of the worst-informed eras in history, just like the
beginning of the 15th century. Countries are ignorant about each other. And,
like Erasmus, exactly when it is needed, Susan Sontag is a communicator in this
broken-down world. Erasmus traveled with 32 volumes, which contained all the
knowledge worth knowing. Susan Sontag carries it in her brain! I know of no
other intellectual who is so clear-minded with a capacity to link, to connect,
to relate. She is unique."

As she sits in her kitchen, she does have the air of one who has wrestled
prodigiously, and over a considerable lifetime, with essential questions.
Wrinkles and creases run wild on her unadorned face. Her skin is as pale as a
monk's. Her long, unruly, onyx-black hair is rent by a dramatic slash of pure
white that runs like an ice flow over the crest of her head. But her candid
expression, her round dark eyes that fill easily with tears, her frequent
laughter and her deep, vibrant voice suggest the eagerness and avidity of a
seeker; a curiously timeworn child who needs a bit more sleep.

"I think I've always wanted to write this book," she is saying. "I'm glad to be
free of the kind of one-note depressiveness that is so characteristic of
contemporary fiction. I don't want to express alienation. It isn't what I feel.
I'm interested in various kinds of passionate engagement. All my work says be
serious, be passionate, wake up."

"The Volcano Lover" anatomizes immense varieties of passionate engagement.
Hamilton loves abjectly not only his art collection, which he continually
augments, but Vesuvius, his beloved volcano, whose threats and displays of
destructive energy hold him in permanent thrall.  He loves Emma as a connoisseur
loves a Leonardo, with cultivated, refined appreciation.

Enter Nelson, the man of action, the genuine hero, and another sort of passion
is ignited in Emma, which relegates Hamilton, the expert on nature's power, to
the status of outsider in the drama of human forces unleashed under his own
roof. And then there are the passions of revolution and an epic array of
18-century follies engendered by romantic dreams of reason.

SONTAG, HERSELF, IS A hybrid of reason and romance. One need only peruse the
vast library in her airy five-room apartment for confirmation. An intellectual
who studies the history of ideas might have many books. But only a person
intemperately in love with reading possesses 15,000.

"I'm an addicted reader," she says, "a hedonist. I'm led by my passions. It's a
kind of greed, in a way." She laughs happily. "I like to be surrounded by things
that speak to me and uplift me."

I ask how the books are arranged.

"Ahhh. By subject or, in the case of literature, by language and
chronologically. The 'Beowulf' to Virginia Woolf principle. I'll show you."

"Nothing is alphabetical?"

"I know people who have a lot of books. Richard Howard, for instance. He does
his books alphabetically, and that sets my teeth on edge. I couldn't put Pynchon
next to Plato! It doesn't make sense."

We enter a room off the kitchen, where Karla Eoff, Sontag's assistant, sits at a
desk answering what she describes as three years of correspondence -- all let go
during the writing of "The Volcano Lover."

"Here is English literature," says Sontag by a floor-to-ceiling bookcase.  "You
need a ladder. It starts here, and here are the Chaucerians." She sweeps her
hand over several shelves, "and then comes Shakespeare, Elizabethan Stuart
plays, Marlowe, Middleton, Webster, the poets," she gestures on through dozens
and dozens of books. "It's very approximate. Here's Beckford, William Blake and
then Wordsworth."

"You don't have a separate poetry section?"

"No. It's all here. It's where they come. There's Byron. I have all of English
literature here. There's Oscar Wilde, and there's Meredith and Hardy. Of course,
when I get into the modern stuff you can see who I read and who I don't. For
instance, I adore V. S. Naipaul.

"And here's French literature.  Up there is Montaigne, then Rabelais, Pascal,
Racine, but it's not just the main people. I have a lot of so-called minor
writers who aren't minor to me."

We move from shelf to shelf, room to room. Spanish, French, Italian literature,
all untranslated. Japanese, Greek, Chinese and Russian literature, in English.

In the living room -- almost empty except for one couch, the only rug in the
apartment and one Mission chair -- is ancient history, Judaism, a huge library
of early Christianity, followed by Byzantium and the Middle Ages.

In Sontag's study is an oddly giant-size burgundy velvet chair, a desk with an
I.B.M. Selectric II typewriter (she has resisted the computer) and, of course
books: here are philosophy, psychiatry and the history of medicine. Discreetly
recessed next to a rose-colored marble fireplace is a tiny room that contains
books by Sontag.

"I used to keep them in my closet."

"Why?"

"Oh," she sighs deeply, "I don't want to look at my own books. A library is
something to dream over, a sort of dream machine."

"Have you read everything here?"

"Oh, yes. Over and over. You see, they're full of slips of paper." Indeed,
narrow strips of white paper stick up from the books like shoots of wild
vegetation. "Each book is marked and filleted. I underline. I used to write in
the margins when I was a child. Comments like 'How true!' And 'I have felt this
also!' " She roars with laughter.

I ask what she wrote in Aristotle.

" 'Aristotle means here that' -- Oh, please! It's so embarrassing now."

We enter the long hallway that connects the rooms. "The art river starts here."

What appears to be a complete library of the history of art, all oversize books,
runs on low shelves from one end of the hallway to the other. On the wall above
the shelves is a series of engravings of Vesuvius, the hand-colored originals
from a book commissioned by Hamilton in 1776. Under the prints, on top of the
bookcase, is the skull of a horse and a circle of wishbones -- rather like a
pagan altar to nature and death. In the rest of the apartment is Sontag's
collection of black-and-white prints by Piranesi and other 18th-century artists.
The volcano prints -- almost the only color in the house -- radiate with the
lurid red of flowing lava.

As I walk down the hall, from Greece into the Renaissance and through the 19th
century, I remark on the uncanny perspective one has just passing by the titles.

"Yes," she says. "What I do sometimes is just walk up and down and think about
what's in the books. Because they remind me of all there is. And the world is so
much bigger than what people remember."

SONTAG'S childhood world, although not materially impoverished, was
intellectually and emotionally meager. Her early years were spent in Arizona,
where she rarely saw her alcoholic mother or her father, who had a fur business
in China, because they spent almost all their time in the Far East. Susan and
her younger sister were cared for by a housekeeper. When Susan was 5, her father
died in China of tuberculosis. Her mother remarried, and the family moved to Los
Angeles. Again, the adults traveled while the children stayed home. Her enormous
intelligence further ordained her solitude. She read at 3, wrote a four-page
newspaper at 8 and had a chemistry laboratory in her garage at 9. Many ardent,
fruitless hours were spent trying to convert neighborhood children to her
interests.

"I can remember my first bookcase when I was 8 or 9. This is really speaking out
of my isolation. I would lie in bed and look at the bookcase against the wall.
It was like looking at my 50 friends. A book was like stepping through a mirror.
I could go somewhere else. Each one was a door to a whole kingdom."

"Did you have a mentor?"

"No, no, no. I discovered books. When I was about 10 years old, I discovered the
Modern Library in a stationery store in Tucson. And I sort of understood these
were the classics. I used to like to read encyclopedias, so I had lots of names
in my head. And here they were! Homer, Virgil, Dante, George Eliot, Thackeray,
Dickens. I decided I would read them all."

"With absolutely no encouragement?" I'm incredulous.

"I didn't allow myself to look for it. And these people couldn't encourage me,
since they didn't understand what I cared about. I very quickly located the
source of judgment completely outside my life -- from the great dead. If
somebody said, 'Oh, you're very smart,' I would feel as if I had been told I had
black hair. It was such a given.  And compared to the standards I was setting
myself, I didn't think I was so smart. I thought that I cared more than other
people. If they cared as much, they could do what I was doing. I didn't think I
was a genius."

"Wasn't your mother proud of you?"

"My mother was a very withholding woman. You have no idea. . . ." Her voice
drifts off. We are back in the kitchen. Her hair, which has been gathered into
the semblance of a ponytail, has been gradually escaping from its elastic band,
which she now removes entirely and plays with in her fingers. Her nails are so
short I think she must have bitten them.

She continues. "I would put my report card by her bed at night and find it
signed at the breakfast table in the morning. She never said a word." She sighs.
"I have a vision of my mother lying on her bed, with the blinds drawn, and a
glass next to her that I thought was water, but I now know was vodka. She always
said she was tired. As a consequence, I am happy to sleep four hours a night."

Sontag's sister, Judith, was only 12 when Sontag left home at 15, and they
hardly saw each other until they were both in their 50's. Judith, who is also
extremely intelligent and went to Berkeley, is married, has one daughter and
lives on the island of Maui, where she owns a small business. The two sisters
discovered to their surprise that they had many things in common -- among them a
love of books.

"I think a childhood like that," Sontag says, "breeds a great talent for
stoicism. If you're going to survive, you say, I can take this; it's bearable.
Otherwise you're lost. I refuse to see myself as a victim. I'm the most
unparanoid person in the world. In fact, I envy paranoids; they actually think
people are paying attention to them." She laughs. "I didn't feel persecuted, I
felt abandoned."

When she was 15, her principal told her she was wasting her time at North
Hollywood High and graduated her. She was delighted. Now her life would really
begin.  After one term at Berkeley, she enrolled at the University of Chicago,
which at that time had a set curriculum and no electives. She took exams when
she entered and placed out of most of her courses. She had already done the
reading.

"I audited classes in the graduate schools, and that was wonderful. I would
start at 9 in the morning and go all day. It was a feast."

It was there she met Philip Rieff, a young instructor in a social theory course
that Sontag had placed out of. It was 1950, December of her second year. On
friends' recommendations she went to hear him lecture on Freud (his 1959 book,
"Freud: The Mind of the Moralist," is essential reading for scholars). Ten days
after the lecture, they were married. She was 17. It was an endless
conversation. He was, she says today, the first person she could talk to.

He seemed older than his 28 years, and Sontag looked extremely young. He was a
dapper Anglophile, while she, a Westerner, lived in blue jeans and wore her hair
long down her back. They were an odd-looking couple. Soon after they were
married, she attended one of his lectures and behind her one student whispered
to another, "Oh, have you heard? Rieff married a 14-year-old Indian!"

For the next nine years, she and Rieff lived an academic life. Their son, David,
was born in 1952. Sontag received master's degrees from Harvard in English
literature and philosophy and finished her course work for a Ph.D. when she
received a fellowship to Oxford. At the same time, Rieff was offered a
fellowship at Stanford. They went separate ways for one academic year, but when
Sontag returned to America the marriage unraveled. It was 1959, and Sontag at
last realized one of her childhood dreams: she moved to New York. She had a
child, a furnished mind and no income. "I had $70, two suitcases and a
7-year-old," Sontag recalls. (Her lawyer told her she was the first person in
California history to refuse alimony.)

David Rieff was another prodigy. He calls himself today "overeducated." His two
books, "Going to Miami" and "Los Angeles, Capital of the Third World," were both
critically acclaimed. I asked him about his childhood, if he felt under great
intellectual pressure, and he said he was comfortable with scholarly activities
-- athletics would have been a reach. He painted a picture of mother and son so
close in age and interests that "separation -- even the ability to distinguish
between who was who -- was difficult and took longer than it should have."
During the first New York years, "I was very aware of how precarious our life
was. We lived in very small, close quarters for a long time. Life was pretty
tough. After that, things started to go much better. She was making a career."

After a stint of teaching philosophy and the history of religion at various New
York colleges, she wrote her first novel, "The Benefactor," and decided to stake
her future on writing full time. In 1964, she emerged as a literary star with an
audacious essay for Partisan Review, "Notes on Camp," which defined for the
first time that esoteric, urban, cult sensibility, which exalted artifice and
mocked seriousness. The essay is peppered with Oscar Wilde quotes, like "To be
natural is such a very difficult pose to keep up."

"On Style," an essay published the following year -- an exhortation to
"encounter" art as "an experience, not a statement or an answer to a question"
-- established her as the seer at the vanguard. She was dubbed the new "dark
lady of American letters," the title previously assigned to Mary McCarthy.

WHEN I ARRIVE AT HER Chelsea apartment for our second day of talks, she has been
correcting the proofs of Emma's death scene and is awash with emotion. But it is
clear that it is the whole project, the fact of this book -- which is so
different from anything she has ever done -- that is overwhelming her this
morning. I ask her again about her notion that "The Volcano Lover" is a turning
point.

"I think every ambitious writer looks for the right form, and I always felt
whatever form I chose constricted me."

Her two novels, "The Benefactor" and "Death Kit," both published in the 60's,
received mixed reviews. Criticized for being too self-conscious, more concerned
with modernist literary fashion than with the raw material of life, they were
nevertheless praised for their powerful intelligence, original ideas and precise
language.

It has been 25 years since "Death Kit," during which time she has become
internationally famous for her essays. Now she says the essay is a dead form for
her.

"The essays were a tremendous struggle. Each of the large ones took nine months
to a year. I've had thousands of pages for a 30-page essay -- 30 or 40 drafts of
every page. 'On Photography,' which is six essays, took five years. And I mean
working every single day."

"When you say working, are you looking things up, checking references?"

"No, no, I don't look anything up until after I've finished and I'm checking.
No, it's just writing. I'd get started, and then I'd run into a ditch, and then
I would start again -- and again."

Temperamentally, Sontag is an admirer. All her best essays celebrate creators,
thinkers or the created work of art. This quality led her into essay writing --
and led her out of it.

"The Canetti essay was the beginning of the end. I wanted to honor Canetti." Her
essay probably helped win him the Nobel Prize. "Yet as I was writing, I thought,
'Why am I doing this so indirectly? I have all this feeling -- I'm in a storm of
feeling all the time -- and instead of expressing it I'm writing about people
with feeling.' "

Twelve years ago in London, while poking around the print shops near the British
Museum, Sontag first saw the volcano prints Hamilton had commissioned. She was
immediately drawn to them and bought several. Years later, she read a biography
of Hamilton and the story began to simmer.

"When I started the novel, it seemed like climbing Mount Everest. And I said to
my psychiatrist, 'I'm afraid I'm not adequate.' Of course, that was a normal
anxiety. What worried me was that I would not be writing essays, because they
have a powerful ethical impulse behind them, and I think they make a
contribution. But my psychiatrist said, 'What makes you think it isn't a
contribution to give people pleasure?' "

She stops talking and bites her lip. She is clearly moved and is trying not to
cry. She takes a deep breath.

"And I thought, ohhhhhh. That sentence launched me."

ILLNESS AS metaphor," "AIDS and Its Metaphors" and "On Photography" -- all
book-length essays -- challenge us to consider a deeper view of the concept of
illness and the effects of the visual image than we ordinarily attempt. Sontag's
object is to liberate perception from the simple and reductive by offering a
more layered analysis. Her essays equate complexity with clarity and obfuscation
with oversimplification.

"Ill people are haunted by dread, shame and humiliation," she says angrily. The
two illness books are an attempt to rectify the human cost of these
superstitious, medieval notions. Above all, she adds, "I am always struggling
against stereotypes."

Robert B. Silvers, the editor of The New York Review of Books, which has
published much of her writing, describes her quest to reject lazy assumptions as
the "cautionary element in her work." Sontag calls it the "Don Quixote in me."

Because her prose is polemical and her philosophy avant-garde, she has, on
occasion, angered many older and more conservative critics. Richard Poirier, for
many years an editor of Partisan Review, remembers when she was an exotically
beautiful young writer for his magazine and aroused the ire of Phillip Rahv and
others of the New York intellectual establishment, who distrusted both her
enthusiasm for popular culture (film, dance, music) and her dense academic
knowledge.

"She was one of those rare creatures," he told me, "who knew about what was
going on in the universities and in European criticism, who had the courage and
the force of will and character to challenge the men in the intellectual
community to pay attention to these things."

IF HER INTELLECT IS rigorous and pure, so is her apartment, for aside from books
and papers, the environment is strikingly Spartan. She says she goes out seven
nights a week with friends for dinner, concerts, plays. She has phenomenal
energy and stays out late, always ready to do one more thing, go one more place.
("Suddenly it's 4 in the morning," she says, "and somebody suggests something
else. You go on. You don't say you're tired or you've had enough. Because you
can never have enough.") Considering her abundant social life, I am amazed at
the absence of furniture -- there are so few places to sit. Doesn't she have
friends over?

"No. This apartment is the inside of my head. It's a map of my brain."

"Have you always lived alone?"

"No, no. Not only have I at different times lived with lovers, but I've had
friends come and stay. I like the idea that there are other bodies in other
rooms." She has never remarried, but she has many intense friendships, which
constitute a kind of multifarious international bond.

FROM THE LATE 1960's to the mid-70's, Sontag was an expatriot. David had dropped
out of Amherst College, and joined her in Paris, living in separate apartments,
entirely absorbed by French culture, rarely speaking English. She returned to
New York in 1976 (by then David was at Princeton), when she was diagnosed with
breast cancer.

"I remember when I was thrown into the world of people with cancer, one of the
things that most surprised me was people saying, 'Why me?' But I saw that for
lots of people these dramatic illnesses became victim situations. Illness is
like a lottery -- some people get ill and you happen to be one of them. I didn't
feel a victim of my illness."

The prognosis was grim. At that time, New York oncologists were more alarmist
about chemotherapy than they are now, so she chose to follow the treatment of
Lucien Israel, a renowned French oncologist, who recommended radically high
doses of chemotherapy, which, in the end, were administered by a reluctant
Sloane-Kettering in New York.

"My New York doctors said, 'Don't you realize that this is very extreme
treatment and you're going to suffer a lot?' And I said" -- her voice is barely
audible -- "but you people don't give me any hope. He's not promising anything,
but he's offering much more treatment."

She underwent chemotherapy for two and a half years -- an unheard-of amount of
time in the 70's. The final cost was near $150,000. Since she had no medical
insurance, Robert Silvers raised the money for her by writing letters and
calling a number of her friends in the intellectual community. Almost everyone
gave something, and those who were able gave a great deal.

"Did you always have hope?"

There is a long silence. "You live with two feelings. I thought I was going to
die. But. . . ." She fingers a small clock with a double face; one for America
and one for Europe. "I really wanted to fight for my life. I was told I had a 10
percent chance to live two years. I thought, well, somebody's got to be in that
10 percent."

"How did you react to dying?"

"I was terrified. Absolutely terrified and horrified. Horrible grief. Above all
to leave David. And I loved life so much. But, I thought, I must believe I will
die, because that's the only way I can have dignity or use the time that's left.
But I also thought, well. . . ." Her voice rises and disappears. "I was never
tempted to say, that's it. I love it when people fight for their lives."

She knew Ingrid Bergman during her last illness and tried to persuade her to see
Dr. Israel, but Bergman refused, saying she'd had a good life and didn't mind
dying.

Sontag is incensed as she tells this story. "I said, 'Why not have more of your
life?' But she said, 'No, no, it's all right.' It drove me crazy -- that anybody
would say that! It's, again, my mother, of course. Resignation, resignation, it
drives me wild."

She is now, except for slight problems with a kidney, in good health. She says
that at 59 she notices no difference in her energy from her early 20's.

There is a great deal of death -- even gore -- in "The Volcano Lover," and I ask
her if she drew on her cancer experiences for those sections.

"If you think you are going to die, and you are spared, you can never completely
disconnect from the knowledge. You always feel a little posthumous. But I think
one's imaginative participation in the horrors that are part of history. . . ."
She looks outside. Her apartment has sweeping views of the Hudson River.  "I can
never take my own unhappiness really seriously because I think so much of how
badly off most people in the world are."

She has always had a high political profile, from her early radical days to her
work on behalf the victims of Soviet totalitarianism. During the Vietnam War,
she made a famous, controversial trip to Hanoi. She remembers a woman she saw in
a factory there, working under the most abject conditions. When Sontag expressed
outrage, the woman told her she was so much better off than her parents,
because, as rice farmers, they lived up to their hips in water.

"I don't think a week goes by when I don't think of that woman. 'I'm dry,' she
said. 'I have work in which I'm dry.' "

I'm reluctant to believe that social morality can be so internalized, and ask
her if it doesn't seem "artificially rational" to ameliorate her own grief by
making make such historic comparisons.

"No, you don't decide!" She is leaning forward passionately. "You either are in
touch with that imaginatively or you're not. It's not deciding -- it's the other
way around. I can't screen it out. I feel I'm receiving messages all the time.
And sometimes I'm overwhelmed."

"Overwhelmed by what?"

"By suffering. A friend once said to me, 'You are lacking a skin that most
people have.' I'm also incredibly squeamish. I cannot watch most American
movies. I don't even have television."

AS PRESIDENT OF PEN in 1987 and as an original member in 1974 (with the founder,
Richard Sennett) of the New York Institute for the Humanities, she has been an
effective advocate for imprisoned writers.

When Sontag conceived of "The Volcano Lover," she acquired an agent (Andrew
Wylie) for the first time in her life and won a lucrative four-book deal with
her lifelong publisher, Farrar Straus Giroux. With that advance, she bought this
apartment. Then, in 1990, she was awarded a MacArthur fellowship, which will pay
$340,000 over five years, plus medical insurance. She is at last comfortably,
even luxuriously, set up.

I experience the monkish silence in her apartment and ask her an odd question.
"Do you believe in an afterlife in which you'll meet your literary heroes?"

"No."

"Most people hope to meet their relatives. You don't anticipate Homer and
Dante?" I'm only partly joking.

"Not at all. What pleases me is just the idea that I'm doing what they did.
That's already so astonishing to me. Because. . . ." She is speechless.
"Literature needs lots of people. It's enough to honor the project."

"What is the project?"

"Oh . . . to . . ." she sighs deeply ". . . to produce food for the mind, for
the senses, for the heart. To keep language alive. To keep alive the idea of
seriousness. You have to be a member of a capitalist society in the late 20th
century to understand that seriousness itself could be in question."

Her leg is propped up childishly on the table. Each day, like a young graduate
student, she has worn the same pair of sweatpants and sneakers, with different
rumpled shirts. She is reluctant to talk about a next project, except to say she
wants to write fiction.

"To me, literature is a calling, even a kind of salvation. It connects me with
an enterprise that is over 2,000 years old. What do we have from the past? Art
and thought. That's what lasts. That's what continues to feed people and give
them an idea of something better. A better state of one's feelings or simply the
idea of a silence in one's self that allows one to think or to feel. Which to me
is the same."

NAME: Susan Sontag

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover Photo: Susan Sontag Photos: Susan Sontag, at left in her kitchen
(Photographs of Sontag by Gregory Heisler for The New York Times)(pg. 20), and a
photograph of Mount Vesuvius, top, which ignites her new novel, "The Volcano
Lover." (Associated Press, Circa 1920)(pg. 21); A Sontag Album -- Sontag in the
living room of her New York apartment. Mother and son at the City Bakery in New
York earlier this year. At home with her assistant, Karla Eoff. (Photographs of
Sontag by Gregory Heisler for The New York Times); Sontag in 1966. (Photograph
by Tony Rollo/Newsweek); Sontag with Lars Swanberg on a postcard announcing the
1969 opening of "Duet for Cannibals," a movie she wrote and directed. Swanberg
was director of photography. With her son, David Rieff, at Harvard, where she
was doing graduate work, circa 1954. Susan and her sister, Judith, circa 1940.
Sontag in Tucson, Ariz., where she spent her early childhood, circa 1943. Sontag
with David Rieff, circa 1964. Susan with Judith in Tucson, circa 1944. (pg.
22-23)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NATION;
The Military Has a Lot To Learn About Women

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


As revelations about sexual misconduct in the armed forces continue to emerge in
the wake of the Tailhook Association scandal, officials find themselves not only
struggling with practical problems of how to integrate women into their ranks,
but with a deeper military-culture dilemma: how to teach sensitivity to trained
killers. After years of instruction about how to be aggressive and violent under
extraordinary combat conditions, these men are under new pressure to check their
behavior around women and keep sexually offensive comments to themselves.

"Until Tailhook, we dealt too often with sexual harassment at the local level,
one case at a time, rather than understanding it as a cultural issue," Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, told a hearing of the House
Armed Services Committee last week.

The assaults on 26 women, including 14 female officers, at last year's
convention of the naval aviators is the military's most serious incident of
sexual misconduct. But the publicity has emboldened other women to come forward.
The Army is investigating reports that dozens of female soldiers were assaulted
in Saudi Arabia by Army men during the Persian Gulf war. The head of an Air
Force fighter wing in South Korea recently was relieved of his command for
making a derogatory remark to a female officer.

Changing behavior is challenging enough; changing attitudes is even harder.
Brig. Gen. Thomas C. Jones, the Army's director of human resources, says views
about women are difficult to alter with 80,000 to 90,000 recruits entering the
Army each year: "They bring with them 17 or 18 years worth of attitudes and
prejudices, some of which are not compatible to be in ready, cohesive forces."

Field commanders agree that units whose leaders do not send a strong message
that sexual harassment will not be tolerated, or that only have a token number
of women, are vulnerable to the greatest problems. But they have also revived
the debate about whether women should be excluded from combat.

Many female officers and military experts argue that as long as women cannot
have combat jobs -- infantry, armor, artillery, fighter jets -- they will always
suffer a second-class status that invites harassment. Some Pentagon officials
retort that integrating women into all-male combat forces will "undermine unit
cohesion." Last year Congress repealed the final laws that barred women from
combat, leaving the decision up to the services. But the Pentagon has delayed
judgment, pending the report of a special Presidential commission.

Echoes of Racial Bias

But "undermining unit cohesion" has an echo nearly 40 years old, when it was
used by opponents of racial integration of the armed forces. Conditions leading
up to the crises about integrating blacks and women into the military bear
striking similarities.

In 1948 President Harry S. Truman ordered the armed forces to be integrated.
Twenty years later, during the Vietnam War, the number of blacks in the military
had risen dramatically, and racial problems were plaguing the services and
eroding combat effectiveness.

The growing problem, coming as a long, difficult war was being fought, was a
wake-up call.

The Pentagon opened the Defense Race Relations Institute at Patrick Air Force
Base, Fla., in the early 1970's. The Army gave racial sensitivity courses to
senior sergeants. The Navy, under Adm. Elmo Zumwalt, created stiff new rules
against racial bias and ordered senior officers to uphold them or be dismissed.

Women's experience in the military has been similarly rough. Women, like blacks,
had long served in their own distinct units, and integration did not begin on a
grand scale until the establishment of the all-volunteer military in 1973. It
also took women about 20 years to make a significant impact; now they represent
about 11 percent of all American armed forces.

The Persian Gulf war was the first major test of the integration of women, and
it was one which they resoundingly passed. But concurrent with that success has
come a heightened awareness of sexual harassment. The military is only now
realizing the magnitude of the problem as well as its threat to the main combat
mission.

Sensitivity Training

Other countries have experimented with different roles for women in the
military. Israel allowed them to fight alongside men in its War of Independence
in 1948, but has since sharply restricted them to support roles. Since Canada
opened all combat positions, except submarines, to women in 1989, the results
have been mixed. Few women choose to join infantry or armor units, and only a
handful have passed a grueling 10-week basic training course.

American female officers and enlisted personnel maintain that several barriers
and biases must still be overcome, but that the climate for women in the
military is steadily improving.

"When I came into basic training 11 years ago, it was: 'Female, do this. Female,
do that," said Sgt. 1st Class Teresa Blount, 31 years old, an 11-year Army
veteran who is a re-enlistment officer at Fort Bragg, N.C. "They don't do that
anymore."

Each of the services has reaffirmed commitments to "zero tolerance" policies
toward sexual harassment. Army equal opportunity officers, for example, give
one-hour sensitivity courses to all troops once every three months.

Lieut. Brenda Holdener, a 31-year-old Navy helicopter pilot who ferried supplies
to United States ships in the Red Sea during the Persian Gulf war, said that
"We're not without the guys who don't want us there, but that just makes women
work harder and want to be there."

Many military women are optimistic that the uproar may open opportunities for
them and tear down the biases they believe foster harassment. But only a
prolonged commitment by political and military leaders to make those cultural
shifts will result in permanent changes.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The chiefs of the armed services, from left, Gen. Carl E. Mundy
Jr. of the Marine Corps, Gen. Merrill A. McPeak of the Air Force, Adm. Frank B.
Kelso 2d of the Navy and Gen. Gordon R. Sullivan of the Army, appearing before
the House Armed Services Committee last week. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Families See Park Plan As Threat to the Land

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words

DATELINE: PEMBROKE, Me.


Albert Cusick's ancestors migrated to America's eastern edge two centuries ago,
claiming the unbroken pine forests and the rocky tidal shore surrounding a
sparkling inlet on the Maine coast.

Not much has changed since then around what is now called Young's Cove.
Wildflowers splash the ridges with brash strokes of red and purple. Bald eagles
circle lazily on warm air currents. This stretch of seaside ground is as wild
and unsullied as any on the East Coast, and because of that the Government has
decided it wants it all, about 600 acres, for enlarging a national wildlife
refuge. Mr. Cusick owns 100 acres, and seven other families own the rest.

Mr. Cusick's neat little Cape Cod house, and those of his neighbors, seem an
unlikely setting for fury against the Government. But that is precisely what has
developed since the Fish and Wildlife Service announced two years ago that it
wanted to protect the refuge, Moosehorn National Wildlife Refuge, by expanding
its boundaries.

'Doesn't Make Any Sense'

"The Constitution of the United States said we can own this property, and my
family has for 206 years," said Mr. Cusick, a 60-year-old retired marine who
served in the Korean and Vietnam Wars. "Then the Government turns around and
said they want it because they think they can manage it better. I'm no college
boy, but that doesn't make any sense to me. What's happening to us just isn't
right."

The refuge's manager promises that land will be bought only from "willing
sellers," but that has done nothing to calm Mr. Cusick's concerns or those of
his neighbors. Despite his appeals not to be included in the refuge's new
boundaries, the Government listed Mr. Cusick's property this year as a priority
for purchase.

Joseph Turner, who lives next door to Mr. Cusick with his wife, Pauline, said:
"For the love of Mike, it scares me every day. They do one thing and say
another, and I really fear for my kids and their kids being able to come back
here. What the Government wants, the Government gets."

The struggle between property owners and the Government for control of Young's
Cove is a microcosm of hundreds of land fights now being waged around New
England and the rest of the country. Leaders of the Young's Cove battle formed a
protest group, the Washington County Alliance, that has joined with 400 other
groups in a national movement to halt Government land acquisitions for parks,
refuges and recreation areas.

Movement Gaining Steam

The property-rights movement has made its presence felt in Congress, state
legislatures and the courts, stirring a backlash against environmentalism that
has attracted considerable support from conservatives in the Bush
Administration.

The Administration supported a South Carolina landowner, David H. Lucas, who
sued to overturn state environmental restrictions on beach-front development; in
June, the Supreme Court sent the issue back to a lower court. . And Interior
Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. and Vice President Dan Quayle have developed an
election-year strategy for shoring up the President's conservative base by
supporting the property-rights movement. They are courting voters in the
Northeast and West whose land was taken by the Government under the right of
eminent domain or who have had the use of their land restricted under Federal
laws like those that protect wetlands.

But leaders of the movement distrust the White House. They say President Bush
has nearly doubled the budget for land acquisitions and has cited the purchase
and preservation of private property as one of the most important facets of his
environmental program.

In 1991, the latest year for accurate figures, the Government spent $293 million
to buy almost 318,000 acres of land, more than in any year since 1978.

Lujan Expresses Sympathy

When asked to explain this seeming contradiction, Mr. Lujan issued a statement
through his press secretary, Steven Goldstein, saying he was sympathetic to the
property owners' complaints. "My view," he said, "is that only certain sites
deserve protection."

Mr. Goldstein added, "As far as buying land, this looks to me like we're damned
if we do and damned if we don't."

Indeed, at the heart of the conflict are two distinct theories about land
conservation. National environmental groups believe that public ownership
represents the best way to preserve wild lands and protect species from
development. They point to Yellowstone, Yosemite and Acadia National Parks as
evidence that public stewardship of the nation's natural heritage benefits
everyone.

Property-rights leaders reply that private landowners are more likely to care
for land than bureaucrats who have no personal or financial stake in the
property. They say national parks like Yosemite and Acadia, which is down the
road from here, are being ravaged by overuse that has left campgrounds in
tatters, trails in disrepair and landmarks defaced by litter and graffiti.

"I don't know what gives the Government any right to think they can take care of
land better than we can," said Mark E. Madden, a retired Boston detective who is
Mr. Cusick's brother-in-law and lives here in the summer.

At least for the time being, groups like the Washington County Alliance have
helped slow the momentum of Federal and state efforts to preserve wilderness
areas. Two years ago, the United States Forest Service and the states of Maine,
New Hampshire, Vermont and New York proposed land-use restrictions on 26 million
acres of forest land from northern New England to the Adirondacks.

Environmentalists Lose Fight

But last year, at public hearings on the northern forests in Bangor, Me.,
property-rights advocates outnumbered environmentalists 3 to 1. Their protests
at the hearing prompted both of Maine's Senators, George J. Mitchell, the
Democratic majority leader, and William S. Cohen, a Republican, to withdraw
their support for the land-use plan. The legislation was not enacted.

The environmentalists place part of the blame for their losing battles on New
England's flat economy. "We take the position that the people fighting us are a
distinct minority," said Everett Carson, the executive director of the Maine
Natural Resources Council, a state environmental group based in Augusta. "In a
down economy, it's a perfect time for a shrill anti-environmental message to
really have some impact."

The fight here in Pembroke, a community of 850 people, came after developers
bought a few acres along Bellier Cove, which borders the Moosehorn National
Wildlife Refuge, with the idea of building houses. The Fish and Wildlife
Service, which manages 90.7 million acres, considers Moosehorn, which was
established at the time of the Depression, one of its most important holdings in
the East because of its value as a nesting and breeding sight for migratory
birds. The 22,975-acre refuge teems with river otters, black bears and
woodcocks.

Backing for the Expansion

Fearful that the development would intrude on the refuge, the Government joined
with environmentalists to block the project. In 1990, the Government proposed a
2,705-acre expansion to protect Moosehorn, including the 600 acres around
Young's cove. The Administration and Congress approved the expenditure of $2
million to begin buying the land.

The Moosehorn expansion has attracted support here. Douglas Mullen, the refuge's
manager, said many landowners had agreed to sell and others were waiting to
sell. "We are purchasing land only from willing sellers," he said.

But Mr. Mullen's assurances have not quelled the fears of those living around
Young's Cove. "The question always is how bad do they want it," Mr. Cusick said.
"What gets me is we have no say. If they want it bad enough, they can take it."

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Albert Cusick and his family have owned 100 coastal acres in
Maine for 206 years, but the Government wants to include the land in Moosehorn
National Wildlife Refuge. "I'm no college boy, but that doesn't make any sense
to me," he said. "What's happening to us just isn't right." (Gary Guisinger for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
This Time, Women Were Running South

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8; Page 4; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: BARCELONA, Spain


It was better this way. Fifty-three years ago, women wearing black trudged
northward in the night along the Costa del Maresme, trying to shelter their
children from the bombs and the bullets of the Spanish Civil War.

Yesterday, that path was retraced, along a coast sparkling with sailboats and
restaurants and people lining the road to cheer. Nearly 50 sleek female runners
from all over the world, wearing the lightest shorts and shirts, the sturdiest
of running shoes, worried about the brutal heat and the pain in their joints
rather than incoming fire.

Valentina Yegorova of the Unified Team beat Yuko Arimori of Japan.

The race should have been run just after dawn, the way they did it in Seoul four
years ago, but what is the health of nearly 50 runners compared with American
television time?

Even with the unnecessary late-afternoon sun, it was still better this way: a
marathon of endurance, not a marathon of fear. This was a race that allowed
women to be athletes and competitors, peaceful warriors rather than refugees.

There was a time when women were not allowed to run 26 miles 385 yards in
public, just like the men. Things began to change in the 1960's when subversives
like Kathy Switzer infiltrated the Boston Marathon, infuriating the old
crustaceans who ran the event. Eventually, women were allowed to enter the
Boston Marathon. Eventually, Grete Waitz became one of the most popular female
athletes in New York for the skillful and gracious way she ran through the five
boroughs every November.

The International Olympic Committee took a little longer. It usually does. Women
were not allowed to run a marathon in the Summer Games until 1984, and it began
on a frightening note.

Everybody who was watching in person or on television will never forget the
sight of Gabriele Andersen-Schiess hobbling into the sunlight of the Los Angeles
Coliseum, twisted every which way by dehydration and cramps, a grotesque
apparition in an oversized white cap, lurching toward the finish line.

"Stop her!" some of us shouted, afraid we were seeing a human being about to
perish as in the old days of other coliseums.

But she reassured the medics who trotted alongside her. She was fine, it was
just a few muscles bent out of shape. She sounded rational. She was an athlete
with a huge amount of will, and she finished 37th, underlining the point that
women can handle a marathon.

There are even studies that indicate women's bodies are better equipped than
men's for the long races. All I know is that the sight of Joan Benoit Samuelson
of the United States and Rosa Mota of Portugal running through great cities like
Los Angeles and Seoul have been memorable.

Marathons are great television. I have never enjoyed my hometown of New York
more than when I was 1,000 miles away and vaguely homesick, watching the New
York Marathon on the tube. A marathon runner truly owns the city, has purchased
it with a pair of feet.

It was thrilling yesterday to watch the women start in Mataro, with its fishing
boats and Roman ruins and maritime museum, and then head south along the Costa
del Maresme.

How perfect to run along this coast. Hundreds of thousands of Catalans will
confide in you about their favorite cove, unreachable by car, that nobody else
knows.

The runners were going south along the coast road, N-II, toward the tangled
alleys and grand boulevards of Barcelona, and then finally up the steep slopes
of Montjuic, past the fans sipping drinks and eating tapas and roaring
encouragement.

The third Olympic women's marathon was also a tribute to the province of
Catalonia, which has asserted its creative and independent spirit in the
post-Franco era.

Yesterday was Dissabtes, Saturday. Prosperous and proud Catalans emerged from
their beach hideaways to applaud runners from Poland and the United States and
Vietnam.

It was better than 53 years ago, when Barcelona was about to be seized by
General Franco's forces in a most dreadful civil war. The Costa del Maresme was
the escape route toward France.

Colm Toibin, in his book "Homage to Barcelona," published by Simon & Schuster
Ltd. of Britain in 1990, describes the night of Jan. 24, 1939, this way:

"There was no moon, there were no cars in the streets, and for the first time in
months no sound of the whistling of falling bombs. They joined the convoy
leaving the city: passing through the silent, dark villages on the road to
Mataro: Badalona, Montgat, Canet de Mar. There was a long line of vehicles and,
when the bombers came overhead, as they did constantly, everybody jumped as
quickly as they could out of the cars and jeeps and lorries and got down on the
ground to avoid being killed by a bomb. Ships also began to bombard the convoy
slowly moving along the coast road."

Yesterday, the traffic went the other way. Television trucks. Press buses.
Support cars. And nearly 50 women in shorts and shirts and sneakers. It was
better this way.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 3, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Moscow Journal;
For Lost Comrades and Old Causes, Vodka Helps

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 2


By noon, it was clear that the gathering of veterans in Gorky Park today was not
going to be a solemn event. Young men, wearing the turquoise caps and striped
shirts that once distinguished elite paratrooper divisions from the
rank-and-file of the old Soviet Army, streamed through the gates, clutching each
other in emotional embraces that still left one hand free for the ubiquitous
bottle of vodka.

By mid-afternoon, the celebration was turning into a drunken brawl, a far cry
from the traditional Victory Day gathering on May 9, when old World War II
soldiers meet in the park and tell their stories to audiences of respectful
citizens. Today, Moscow militiamen, huddling together for protection, were
warning passersby to stay clear of the fistfights that had broken out by the
fountains at the park's entrance.

"We don't get involved," said one militiamen, extracting a photographer from the
grasp of a particularly surly veteran. "Better to let them to sort it out on
their own."

In recent times, the anniversary of the creation of the Soviet paratrooper
forces has been the unofficial day for veterans of the nine-year war in
Afghanistan to get together, share war stories and remember comrades killed in
battle. With each passing year, new veterans were added to the mix, young
soldiers who have seen combat not in distant wars fought in the name of
"international duty," but within the borders of the old Soviet Union: in Baku,
Stepanakert, Tbilisi and Vilnius, wherever Moscow saw fit to send in troops.

A Raucous Reunion



In the last few years, the Aug. 2 gathering of several hundred turqoise-capped
men has earned a rowdy reputation. Expecting trouble this year, the city closed
Gorky Park's cafes and amusement park, grounding the boats on the lake in the
middle of park.

Even so, a few families came to the park for a Sunday outing, only to see
half-naked men taking plunges into the shallow fountains, vomiting over the
backs of park benches or smashing bottles with their hands. "Shame!" muttered
one elderly lady, casting a disapproving eye on the boisterous veterans.

But for the veterans -- many of them under 30 years old -- the day still held
its special meaning, even though the country and the army they once served are
no more.

"For us, this day is more important than New Year's, more important than our
birthdays," said Oleg Babusyenko, a 23-year-old who now serves in the militia in
Tyumen, in western Siberia.

"We are all brothers," said Slava Kormikhin, an Afghanistan veteran, who now
works as a driver in the Ministry of Defense. "And we all think the same: If you
are not a paratrooper, you are not a man."

As they talked, the men spoke mostly of their loyalty to one another and to
their former commanders, many of whom have recently risen to high posts in the
Russian Army. Pavel Grachev, now Russia's Minister of Defense, is an
"Afghanets," whose men speak glowingly of him as a commander who did his best to
hold down casualties in the field.

But the last few years have left many of these veterans with a profound distaste
for politicians. "We went where granddad Brezhnev sent us," said 30-year-old
Igor who spent two years in Afghanistan and would not give his last name. "It
was a mistake by our Government, not by us. We were pieces on a checkerboard,
just like the Americans who went to Vietnam."

Sergei Agapov, 21, came home not from Afghanistan, where the last Soviet troops
left in 1989, but from Lithuania, where he served as a paratrooper during the
violent attempt by Soviet troops to seize the Vilnius radio and television tower
in January, 1991. "I did not do anything to besmirch the Lithuanian nation," he
said. "They were just doing what we did here in Moscow during last August's
coup." Nothing in this past year has changed his mind about the need to defend
democracy. "I am more free now than I was," he said.

But for others, there is lingering confusion about who was fighting whom and for
what in the Soviet Union's final days. Igor Ruban, now a security guard, still
insists that the special forces sent into Georgia in April 1989 were defending
themselves, even though history has passed a different verdict on clashes that
left 20 Georgian civilians dead. His friend Sasha Andreyev, tells of being
caught in a "rumble" in Nagorno-Karabakh, the enclave in Azerbaijan that has
been a battlefield between Armenians and Azerbaijanis.

The pain of the Afghanistan experience is still there for many, particularly
since the monument in Moscow that was to be built in honor of the veterans is
still nothing more than a bare pedestal. Viktor Yemolkin, 26, now a student of
law in St. Petersburg, was going there with his old comrades this evening to lay
flowers.

The Afghan Syndrome

Like many other veterans of Afghanistan, Mr. Yemolkin has had enough of war.
"I'm a pacifist," he said. But both he and his comrade Yevgeni Yeleseyev, also
26, said they do not regret their time in Afghanistan.

"It was a school that we went through." Mr. Yeleseyev said, "And now I know it."

The younger men look on the Afghan war with some awe. "We respect you," said one
drunken soldier, his cap askew, clutching an Afghanistan veteran around the
neck.

"They saw more and they know more," said Maksim Tirin, who was once an
instructor at the elite paratrooper school, and now works as a private security
guard for a commercial bank. "It is not a question of right or wrong, they
fought. We all served in the same armed forces, no matter what they call it
now."


LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Russian paratroopers embracing yesterday in Gorky Park in
Moscow. Hundreds of veteran Russian paratroopers gathered for the day to
celebrate their prestigious status in a country and army now defunct.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 3, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Chief's Dispute With Council Boils Over

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1948 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 30


The peacemakers who run the United Nations are fighting again.

Not since the days of Dag Hammarskjold, the Secretary General from Sweden, who
locked horns three decades ago with the Soviet delegation over policy on the
Congo, have the Security Council's permanent members been confronted with a
Secretary General so determined to shape the international organization.

The French press has called the dispute "la petite guerre" because the diplomats
here have been, at moments, so undiplomatic.

The Limits of Diplomacy

"You have to be a diplomat at certain times and at certain times you have not to
be a diplomat," said Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the former Egyptian Foreign Ministry
official who took over as Secretary General from Javier Perez de Cuellar in
January.

"Certain facts have to be said," he insisted.

The dispute, which had been building all year, broke into the open in mid-July.
The Council and the Secretary General had pointed differences over how to stop
the killing in fractured Yugoslavia and how to save millions of starving people
in Somalia, where civil war has led to famine. Mr. Boutros-Ghali challenged the
Security Council's decision to expand the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Yugoslavia if this was to occur at the expense of urgently needed
peacekeeping and relief operations in black Africa.

Both sides compromised, but the dispute has festered and at times has erupted
into a collision of cultures between the Secretary General, who feels compelled
to speak for the less powerful nations of the third world, and the Western
powers that dominate the Security Council.

Mr. Boutros-Ghali, the sixth man to hold the top peacemaking job and the first
from an Arab country, Egypt, and from the African continent, sees the dispute as
a clash between the "colonial" powers of Europe and the desperate and often
neglected developing world.

Discord in Crucial Period

The episode is producing an unusual degree of disharmony at a time when the
United Nations is more heavily engaged around the world than at any other time
in its 47-year history. It has caused bitter and personal recriminations,
aborted a sensitive United Nations dialogue with Libya last week and injected a
level of discord that could further disrupt and delay critical Security Council
decisions, a number of United Nations officials and diplomats said.

The United Nations has major operations in Cambodia, Iraq, the Western Sahara
and now in what was Yugoslavia. It is also involved in longstanding operations
in Cyprus and Lebanon and is undertaking new efforts in Somalia and South
Africa.

All of these have deepened the financial crisis brought on by the $2 billion in
arrears from donor nations, including $800 million that the United States has
not paid.

One Western diplomat has described the Secretary General's recent actions as
"petulant," "inflexible" and "disingenuous." Others have faulted him for being
prickly, "arrogant" and "aloof."

Mr. Boutros-Ghali was no less blunt, pointing out that the Security Council had
for the most part acceded to his views on Yugoslavia and Somalia. He bristled at
the criticism he has received recently in the British press and wondered aloud
in an interview on Thursday if it was "maybe because I'm a wog," using the
19th-century British pejorative for colonial subjects.

His characterizations stunned United Nations officials, who avoid even the hint
of ethnic epithet. Sir Brian Urquhart, the longtime United Nations Under
Secretary who is now at the Ford Foundation, could only gasp on hearing Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's reference to the possible "wog" factor: "My my . . .  dear me. .
. ."

A Longing for Yesteryear

A French diplomat lamented that in the days of Mr. Perez de Cuellar the
Secretary General was "more consensual" and "when the Council wanted something,
the Secretary General was at their disposal." Indeed, many missions have been
surprised by what some view as Mr. Boutros-Ghali's imperious and mercurial
style.

The Secretary General often goes over the heads of delegates to deal directly
with their Foreign Ministry bosses. Adding to an image of aloofness, he seldom
shows up for informal meetings of the Security Council because, he said, of the
crushing workload that has been placed on the Secretariat to streamline the
organization and run proliferating peacekeeping operations.

The Secretary General, the French diplomat added, "has his own personality and
we cannot expect him to act and to react as his predecessor." But, he concluded,
"if this kind of relationship continues, I don't think it is favorable for
anyone."

The stress of Mr. Boutros-Ghali's first seven months was apparent in the
interview. The normally relaxed and witty 69-year-old Egyptian scholar, most
famous for having been at the side of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt when he
flew to Jerusalem in 1977, fidgeted with a bundle of pencils in front of him as
he sat at the felt-covered conference table in the cavernous Secretary General's
suite on the 38th floor of what Mr. Boutros-Ghali calls "this house."

Some Blunt Talk

In assailing his critics, he lapsed at times from the high language of pin
stripes to seething denunciations. On several occasions he ordered a reporter to
turn off a tape recorder so he could answer more bluntly. Pointing to the
machine, he snapped, "Please stop it," before responding to what he said was
"another lie."

Speaking in English in which Arabic and French accents blended, he acknowledged
that, at times, his behavior had been less than diplomatic, but he said that was
not the problem.

"The problem is, one, the ego of certain members of the Security Council are
accustomed to being treated in a certain way. Secondly, because maybe I don't
spend enough time with them, certainly this is the second reason. But the simple
explanation is high policy -- the policy of the states."

He further explained, saying: "When a country is in difficulty with its public
opinion concerning what to do in Yugoslavia, or when there are other problems,
they are a monster. They will not hesitate to find the body to accuse him of all
the sins."

Asked if he meant that too many countries were hoisting their problems and
frustrations onto the United Nations, he said, "Certainly, to the Secretary
General, to the U.N." He suggested that a combination of what he termed
"Europecentrism" and the inability of third world nations to address their
economic and social ills was the greatest obstacle to building an effective
United Nations program for the future.

'So Many Problems'

"The real problem of the next 10 years will be mainly in the countries of the
third world," he said, "and the problems of the third world is not only the
military confrontations, but the problem of refugees, hunger, drought.  So many
problems."

But he added: "If we continue to get involved in Yugoslavia, this will be at the
expense of the other activity of the house. At a certain time, we must say,
'Stop.' "

With the perennial shortage of cash, Mr. Boutros-Ghali warned in May that "our
plate is full," and that any new peacekeeping responsibilities would have to
come at the expense of other urgently needed relief and peacekeeping efforts.

Then, on July 17, the Security Council, with Mr. Boutros-Ghali absent, accepted
a cease-fire accord for Yugoslavia hammered out by Lord Carrington of Britain
and a European Community team of negotiators in London. The accord, which failed
to stop the fighting, would have placed a significant burden on the United
Nations by sending its forces into the combat zone to locate and collect the
dueling artillery batteries in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

When Mr. Boutros-Ghali learned of the Security Council's action, he objected,
arguing that collecting the guns would take three months and 1,100 men. He also
feared that such actions would draw United Nations forces into a what he termed
"a new Vietnam" that would strain United Nations resources at a time when they
were needed elsewhere, particularly in Somalia, where a quarter of the
population of 4.5 million to 6 million is facing death from famine this summer.

"I believe it is my duty to put the minimum pressure on the Europeans to say,
'Try to do something,' " he said. When the French military Chief of Staff told
him that French and other European military forces could complete the artillery
survey in Yugoslavia in three days, Mr. Boutros-Ghali seized on this assertion
to put more pressure on the European powers to take part in bringing peace to
their own region.

The United Nations Charter, Mr. Boutros-Ghali has become fond of saying, states
that "the regional organizations" like the European Community and the Western
European Union "are at the service of the United Nations, not that the United
Nations is at the service of the regional organizations."

Sir Brian said he thought the Secretary General was right to be upset over how
the London accord was handled. "You cannot suddenly tell a guy who is
responsible for a peacekeeping operation that you are going to add an enormous
burden to a group that is hopelessly overstressed," he said.

'Under Great Pressure'

At the same time, Sir Brian added that he thought it "very odd" for the
Secretary General to "widen the issue" by accusing the Council of being
Eurocentric.

"I think he is under great pressure," he said, adding, "The European efforts to
deal with Yugoslavia have been hopeless and it may be useful for them to blame
the U.N. if nothing is happening."

There was more than a hint of scorn in Mr. Boutros-Ghali's voice over Lord
Carrington's refusal to go to Sarajevo to try to wring a lasting cease-fire
accord out of the warring factions. He contrasted the talks held at a safe
distance in London with the willingness of Cyrus R. Vance, the former American
Secretary of State, to conduct negotiations where the fighting was taking place.

Mr. Boutros-Ghali said that when Lord Carrington's accord collapsed, the
Europeans "just threw the ball" to the United Nations

'Backstabbing' Politics

One United Nations diplomat, defending the Secretary General, sneered at the
"backstabbing" politics of the Security Council and wondered why the Europeans
could not take on some of the military burden.

"Of course they are worried about their boys being killed, so they would rather
have Fijians do it for them," the diplomat said, referring to the Fijian
contingent among United Nations peacekeeping forces.

By all accounts, in pouncing on Lord Carrington's handiwork Mr. Boutros-Ghali
not only angered the former British Foreign Minister, but also embarrassed Sir
David Hannay, the British representative at the United Nations, who had pushed
the London accord through the Security Council in the Secretary General's
absence.

Western diplomats point out that the Mr. Boutros-Ghali had two representatives
in the chamber when the Council acted and must therefore share the blame for the
failure of coordination and communication.

Western officials also said that despite the eloquence of Mr. Boutros-Ghali on
behalf of Somali famine victims, he had been slow to recognize that the staff
member he put in charge of the negotiations was not up to the task and only
belatedly removed him.

Despite the problems, the Secretary General predicted that his "controversy"
with the Security Council would pass.

"This is quite exaggerated," he said of the dispute, "and I will say it is
healthy."

He admonished a reporter at the end of the interview not to "provoke" or strain
his relationship with the Security Council further because, he said, "it is my
job to be provocative."


NAME: Boutros Boutros-Ghali

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations.
(pg. A1); "You have to be a diplomat at certain times and at certain times you
have not to be a diplomat," said Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, left,
who challenged the Security Council's decision to expand the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Yugoslavia. Mr. Boutros-Ghali spoke last week with Sir
David Hannay, British chief delegate to the United Nations, at a Council
meeting. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times) (pg. A9)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BROWN'S RESIGNATION;
Interim Leader Has a Reputation as a Problem-Solver

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 572 words


Long known in the upper ranks of the New York City Police Department as a
problem-solver and a sure-handed manager, Raymond W. Kelly began his career in
the department 29 years ago as a cadet fresh from college.

In recent weeks Mr. Kelly, the department's second-ranking official until his
appointment yesterday as acting commissioner, has been in charge of
investigating accusations that senior officers interfered with an Internal
Affairs inquiry into an officer suspected of drug trafficking.

Earlier in his career, Mr. Kelly was assigned to take charge of the troubled
106th Precinct in Queens when it was disclosed that some officers had tortured
drug suspects with stun guns. He was widely praised by police and city officials
for his aggressive and effective handling of that situation.

Called 'Strong Leader'

Gerald W. Lynch, the president of John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said Mr.
Kelly was committed to community policing, the program pushed by the departing
Commissioner, Lee P. Brown, to put more officers on foot patrol in
neighborhoods. Mr. Lynch, who was chairman of the search committee that
recommended Mr.  Brown to Mayor David N. Dinkins in December 1989, said he
believed Mr. Kelly "can step right in there and continue the Mayor's agenda."

"I think he is the consummate professional," Mr. Lynch said.  "He's a strong
leader, committed to community policing. He is a man who can make decisions."

At a press conference yesterday with Mayor Dinkins and Mr. Brown, Mr. Kelly said
his top priority would be to finishing putting the community-policing program
into effect.

Mayor Dinkins said Mr. Kelly would be considered as a candidate for permanent
appointment as commissioner. But the Mayor will face tremendous pressure from
his core constituents to choose a black or Hispanic candidate to satisfy critics
who say the department is still dominated by white officers who do not
understand the concerns of minority residents. Mr. Kelly is white.

Mr. Kelly's appointment as acting commissioner is in line with a national trend
of selecting highly educated officials for top posts in large urban police
departments.  Mr. Kelly, who is 50 years old, earned an undergraduate degree
from Manhattan College in 1963, a master's in public administration from Harvard
University in 1984, and degrees from St. John's University School of Law in 1971
and New York University Law School in 1974.

Having considered a military career, he became interested in police work soon
after joining the Police Cadet Program at Manhattan College. Upon graduation,
Mr. Kelly, who was born and raised on the Upper West Side, became a city police
officer at age 21.

Almost immediately, however, he took a leave from the department to serve three
years in the Marine Corps, including a year in Vietnam.

Currently, Mr. Kelly is a colonel in the Marine Corps Reserve.

Upon his return to the department, Mr. Kelly began to impress his commanders and
began a steady climb: he was promoted to sergeant in 1969, lieutenant in 1974,
captain in 1980, deputy inspector in 1984 and inspector the following year. He
achieved the two-star rank of assistant chief and headed the Office of
Management Analysis and Planning at Police Headquarters before being named First
Deputy Police Commissioner by Mr. Brown in 1990.

Mr. Kelly and his wife, Veronica, live in Manhattan and have two grown sons,
James and Gregory.


NAME: Raymond W. Kelly

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Raymond W. Kelly before meeting in City Hall yesterday with
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who named him Acting Police Commissioner. (Dith Pran/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Panel Urges Phaseout of Anti-Communist Broadcasts

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 3


Joining a debate on the future of Government broadcasting overseas that began
with the end of the cold war, a Presidential commission called today for the
phasing out of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, and the scuttling of a
proposal to create a Radio Free China on the same model.

Proposals that the United States begin beaming news and propaganda to China --
and possibly to Vietnam and North Korea -- are now being considered by Congress,
where old alignments on the issue of foreign broadcasts have been reversed.

A Democrat, Senator Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, introduced legislation to
create Radio Free China, with the support of Senator George J. Mitchell of
Maine, the majority leader.

Wants to Halt Cuba Broadcasts

President Bush and many Republicans, normally supporters of broadcasts to
Communist nations, oppose the move. The Administration apparently wants to avoid
antagonizing Beijing. He told a group of Asian-American journalists in June that
"the difficulty with this one is strictly on money."

Reporting its proposal today, the United States Advisory Commission on Public
Diplomacy also recommended the shutting down of TV Marti, which beams predawn
programs to Cuba that have been routinely jammed by Fidel Castro's Government.

"There are a hell of a lot of pieces of change that can be used in better ways
to tell America's story," said Tom C. Korologos, chairman of the advisory
commission and a Washington lobbyist with links to a succession of Republican
Presidents. "That's $25 million that doesn't need to be spent this way."

The study by the six-member advisory commission is the second investigation of
foreign broadcasting in less than a year by a high-level team. In December, the
President's Task Force on United States Government International Broadcasting,
concluded that Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty should be redefined, not
curtailed.

The 11-member task force, whose chairman was John Hughes, a former director of
the Voice of America and later State Department spokesman, split over the issue
of creating a Radio Free China and other "surrogate" radio networks for Vietnam
and North Korea on the European model.

Surrogate stations were set up to beam into Communist countries news not
available from their governments. Based in Munich, Radio Free Europe,
established in 1949, and Radio Liberty, which began a year later, are separate
from the Voice of America, which is a worldwide service that broadcasts general
news, music, features and commentary. Both panels advocate strengthening the
Voice of America, which with the BBC provides the most reliable and objective
news available in many third-world countries but which is not heard in the
United States.

Bipartisan Support in Senate

Senator Biden, whose bill to create Radio Free China has received the bipartisan
cosponsorship of a majority of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was also
responsible for establishing a separate commission to look at Government
broadcasting to Asia. The commission is headed by Mr. Hughes, the Presidential
task force chairman who is now director of the International Media Studies
Program at Brigham Young University.

In June, the Asia commission called off a visit to Beijing because of conditions
set by the Chinese. The group had hoped to discuss with officials the effect
that a Radio Free China might have on relations with the United States. Mr.
Biden said he hoped that it would catalyze discussion among the Chinese, and
even spur dissent.

"In an age of instant communication, it is astonishing that the people of China
remain largely ignorant about events in their own country," he said in
introducing his bill on July 2.

The advisory commission's members are, in addition to Mr. Korologos, the
chairman; William J. Hybl, president of the United States Olympic Committee;
Edwin J. Feulner, Jr., president of the Heritage Foundation; Lewis W. Douglas,
Jr., chief executive of Stanley Energy; Walter R. Roberts, diplomat in residence
at George Washington University, and Pamela J. Turner, vice president for
government relations at the National Cable Television Association.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-C.I.A. Officer Testifies About Arming Contras

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


Felix Rodriguez, a retired Central Intelligence Agency officer who spent most of
his career on the shadowy side of the espionage business, appeared today in
Federal District Court to testify in the trial of the agency's former chief of
covert operations.

It was the first court appearance for Mr. Rodriguez, who, under the alias of Max
Gomez, helped the Reagan Administration make clandestine shipments of arms by
way of El Salvador to the contras, or rebels, who fought the Sandinista
Government of Nicaragua in the mid 1980's. In 1987 he testified before a joint
Congressional committee that investigated the arms supplies shipped to the
rebels in defiance of a law passed by Congress.

Under prosecution and defense questioning, Mr. Rodriguez restated much of his
1987 testimony, adding a few piquant details about his relationship with the
C.I.A. and the secret contra supply operation.

Bay of Pigs Veteran

The testimony was the highlight of the day's proceedings in the trial of Clair
E. George, the C.I.A.'s former deputy director for operations, who is charged
with lying to a grand jury and misleading Congress. Mr. George's trial is the
latest in the Iran-contra affair.

Mr. Rodriguez, a stocky Cuban exile who fought at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 and
subsequently joined the C.I.A., testified that he initially went to El Salvador,
in March 1985, to help set up a helicopter raiding operation against Communist
guerrillas in that country. He had retired from the agency nine years earlier.

"Having lost my country to Communism -- Cuba -- I thought it would be useful to
stop Communism in Central America," said the 51-year-old Mr. Rodriguez, who wore
a Bay of Pigs medal issued by the C.I.A. and the agency's decoration for valor
in Vietnam in his lapel.

He said he went to El Salvador with the blessing of Donald P. Gregg, who was
then the national security adviser to Vice President George Bush. He said he
also met Mr. Bush at that time.

Mr. Rodriguez said he was well along on his efforts to put into effect his
"helicopter concept" in El Salvador when, on Sept. 29, 1985, he received a
letter from Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North of the Marine Corps, the National
Security Council staff member in charge of clandestine assistance for the
contras. He said Colonel North asked him to set up a maintenance operation for
planes flying supplies to the Nicaraguan rebels. Colonel North also urged him to
avoid contact with C.I.A. operatives in the area, he said.

Coordinator for North

When asked what he did for Colonel North's operation, Mr. Rodriguez said, "I
coordinated for them" at the Ilopango air base outside San Salvador by arranging
for refueling and servicing planes, and by feeding and housing pilots. At the
same time, he said, he continued to run helicopter raids inside El Salvador.

Mr. Rodriguez testified that his first encounter with C.I.A. officials connected
with the contra supply operation was when Colonel North flew to Ilopango
accompanied by Alan D. Fiers, a deputy of Mr. George who was in charge of the
agency's Central American Task Force. Mr. Fiers has become the prosecution's
chief witness against Mr. George.

Mr. Rodriguez said that he met Mr. Fiers twice but that he had not met Mr.
George until last month, in the company of defense counsel.

He said that in the spring of 1986 he became disillusioned with the contra
assistance effort when he learned that Colonel North had involved Gen. Richard
V. Secord of the Air Force and Thomas Clines, a former C.I.A. officer, in the
operation. Mr. Rodriguez said he "wasn't very comfortable" with this because he
knew of their involvement in a scandal over illegal shipment of arms to Libya.
"I thought I should quit," he said.

A Meeting With Bush

But on May 1, 1986, Mr. Rodriguez said, he was ushered into a meeting with Mr.
Bush by Mr. Gregg, a friend from the Vietnam era, and in the company of Edwin
Corr, the United States Ambassador to El Salvador.

Mr. Rodriguez testified that Ambassador Corr was so lavish in his praise of the
helicopter assaults that he decided to keep on performing his El Salvador tasks.
He also said the contra supply operation was never mentioned in the meeting with
Mr. Bush.

Mr. Rodriguez testified that he stopped working for Colonel North in October
1986 when one of the supply planes was shot down over Nicaragua and a survivor
disclosed details of the operation to the press. He said he stayed on in El
Salvador with his helicopter raids until 1989.

Earlier today, the prosecution and defense counsel closely questioned
Representative Matthew F. McHugh, Democrat of upstate New York, about his role
as a member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, which was
overseeing the C.I.A. at the time of the secret supply operations for the
contras.

Mr. McHugh said that at no time in his frequent contacts with the oversight
panel had Mr. George mentioned Colonel North's role in running the contra supply
operation from the White House.

'Suspicions' Recalled

He also testified that his "suspicions were raised" when Mr. George told the
committee in October 1986 that the C.I.A. did not know the people who were
running the covert supply operation, although he did identify Mr. Rodriguez as
one of the participants.

"I had difficulty with the proposition that they didn't know," he said. "They
were not prohibited from collecting information."

At the close of the morning session Judge Royce C. Lambrecht took note of an
article Monday in The New York Times reporting that a former C.I.A. agent used
an electronic device to listen in on a conversation between lawyers and the
judge at the bench last week. He warned that anyone found doing that would be
locked up and held in contempt of court.

Subsequently, the former agent said that during a court session he had used a
hearing aid given him by a friend, but denied to reporters that the device was
capable of eavesdropping on conversations at a distance.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Jury Is Told Spy Questioned Reagan Secrecy Order

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5


A retired general testified today in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, a
former chief of covert operations for the Central Intelligence Agency, that the
former spy had questioned the wisdom of a Presidential order keeping the arms
sales to Iran secret from Congress.

Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force major general who has pleaded guilty to
misleading Congress about the affair, said in his testimony that Mr. George had
expressed doubts about President Ronald Reagan's order at a White House meeting
that Mr. Secord had attended in January 1986.

The order, known as a Presidential finding, was signed by Mr. Reagan on Jan. 17,
1986. It provided the legal basis for several weapons deals with Iran involving
direct shipments from the United States. Previous arms sales had taken place in
1985, but had used Israel as an intermediary.

The arms sales, which were intended to win the release of the American hostages
being held in Lebanon by groups under the influence of Iran, continued until the
fall of 1986, when a Lebanese publication dislosed them.

"Was there a discussion of the finding and the notification of Congress?" asked
Richard Hibey, Mr. George's lawyer.

"Yes," replied Mr. Secord, adding that the "finding said Congress should not" be
notified.

When Mr. Hibey asked in his cross-examination what Mr. George had said, the
witness answered, "Clair George raised questions about the wisdom of not telling
Congress."

Mr. Secord's testimony appeared to help Mr. George, who is on trial in Federal
District Court on charges of lying to a grand jury investigating the scandal,
and of misleading Congress.

But by placing Mr. George at the White House meeting, Mr. Secord also bolstered
one of the main prosecution charges, that Mr. George had lied when he told a
Senate committee in late 1986 that he had "never laid eyes on" Mr. Secord. Mr.
Secord, who left the military in early 1980's to became an international arms
trader, was brought into the Iran-contra affair by William J. Casey, the
Director or Central Intelligence.

Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, a former National Security Council aide, asked Mr.
Secord to assemble the network of planes, boats and mercenaries that evolved
into the weapons pipeline to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, after
Congress cut off direct aid to them in 1984. Mr. Secord also used his overseas
bank accounts, contacts with arms dealers and international air cargo companies
to arrange for the shipments of arms to Iran.

Today Mr. Secord, the swashbuckling veteran of unconventional air warfare in
Vietnam, described himself as a "logistician" and "an operational type." Mr.
Secord took credit for the diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales to the
contras, one of the most incendiary and hotly debated issues of the affair.

He said that when the rebels were running out of money in the spring of 1986, he
simply transferred funds from one of his foreign bank accounts which held funds
from Iran arms sales, to a contra bank account. "This was not a diversion," he
said. "It was simple transfer of funds. I made the decision. No one else made
the decision."

Others have said they also played a role. Some Administration officials have
said the idea originated with Manucher Gorbanifar, a Middle Eastern businessman
who initially acted as the middleman between the Iranians and the Reagan
Administration. Mr. North said he approved the arrangement, and John M.
Poindexter, a former national security adviser, said that he authorized it, but
never told President Reagan.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Paul D. Butcher, 62; Leader in the Gulf War

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


Vice Adm. Paul D. Butcher, retired, who capped 43 years in the Navy by helping
to organize the movement of American forces to the Persian Gulf region, died on
Monday at his home in Tampa, Fla. He was 62 years old.

A Navy spokeswoman at the Pentagon, Lieut. Karen Jeffries, said she did not know
the cause of death.

Admiral Butcher joined the Navy as an apprentice seaman in 1948. He was
commissioned an ensign five years later and rose to a destroyer command during
the Vietnam War. He was the first director of planning of the Rapid Deployment
Joint Task Force, which drew up detailed plans for protecting Persian Gulf
oilfields.

During the 1991 war against Iraq, he served as chief of staff and deputy
commander of the United States Transportation Command.

Admiral Butcher, an avid baseball fan and friend of George Steinbrenner, the
principal owner of the New York Yankees, retired in 1991. Mr. Steinbrenner named
him his successor as chairman and chief executive of the American Ship Building
Company in Tampa, Fla. Admiral Butcher was head of the company at his death.

Admiral Butcher is survived by his wife, the former Phyllis Christian; two
daughters, Emily Rose Butcher of Manassas, Va., and Susan K. King of Culpeper,
Va.; a son, Thomas E. of Vienna, Va., and two grandchildren.


LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Hanoi Is Blocking Progress on Missing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5


The Pentagon said today that Hanoi had begun to put new obstacles in the way of
resolving more quickly the cases of American servicemen still unaccounted for
from the Vietnam War.

The two countries had just begun to make significant progress on the issue,
which is blocking the normalization of relations and the lifting of an American
economic embargo. Joint American-Vietnamese teams have been excavating crash
sites and conducting interviews in wide areas of Vietnam.

"The train is fast coming to a halt," Col. John Cole, chief of the Defense
Intelligence Agency's office in Bangkok, told the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs near the end of two days of testimony on the most
emotional aspect of the issue, the reports of live sightings. "The Vietnamese
are beginning to change the rules."

The Pentagon says it has 110 unresolved, first-hand reports from Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos of sightings of Americans covering nearly 19 years since
United States forces were withdrawn from Indochina and Hanoi said all prisoners
had been returned. The Defense Department lists 2,266 Americans still
unaccounted for in Indochina, although half of them are assumed to have died.

Colonel Cole told the committee that in a meeting a week ago, Hanoi demanded
full files from the United States on reports by people who claim to have seen
Americans, including information on sources. Vietnam would then decide which
cases to investigate.

Senior Defense Intelligence Agency officials testifying before the committee
said the United States would not jeopardize sources by complying with the
request. Vietnam has also denied that it ever offered free access to prisons in
the search for Americans.

In testimony, officials acknowledged that they had not asked for access to a
Vietnamese Defense Ministry compound in Hanoi that has been the source of
persistent rumors and refugee accounts of an underground prison housing
foreigners.

Today, a brief confrontation erupted between the committee and the defense
intelligence officials, led by Robert Sheetz, chief of the Pentagon's Special
Office for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, when it was determined that nine photographs
of the Hanoi site, known since French colonial days as the Citadel, had been
reversed in printing -- the equivalent of viewing a slide backward in a
projector -- before being turned over for exhibition in the hearing room, making
sites difficult to identify.

The committee's vice chairman, Senator Bob Smith, a New Hampshire Republican,
challenged the intelligence agency to prove that it had not been confusing
informers by showing them similarly reversed pictures of the Citadel site. Mr.
Sheetz apologized and said there had been no intention to deceive.

Might Be Non-Americans

Reports of sightings, the majority of them later proved to be false, have played
a large part in creating accusations of Government conspiracies among groups
lobbying for the prisoners of war and those missing in action. Defense
intelligence officials reiterated today that they believed that most of the
sightings are of Russians or Europeans or Cubans working in Indochina.

But committee members said that as long as Laos and Vietnam barred American
teams from areas that have generated some of the more credible reports, the
sense of cover-up would grow, despite stepped up efforts by the Defense
Department to narrow the list of the missing considerably.

Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the
committee, asked today that officials and relatives of the missing consider the
plight of Vietnam, where officials cannot be expected to open their most
sensitive files and sites to the American military and where the bureaucracy can
stall even the most well intended plan.

On the other hand, giving the Vietnamese more time and information on sites to
be studied, Senator Kerry said, only increases the chances that lobby groups
will find investigations unsatisfactory because they will believe prisoners were
quickly moved by Hanoi.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

STATE DEPT. ASKS WAR CRIMES INQUIRY INTO BOSNIA CAMPS

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 5


Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger said today that reports of
atrocities at detention centers in Bosnia and Herzegovina were "profoundly
disturbing" and called for a war-crimes investigation.

Apparently in an attempt to rebut charges that the Bush Administration has put
too low a priority on curbing the fighting in Bosnia, Mr. Eagleburger issued a
statement detailing new American efforts to increase pressure on both sides to
open detention camps to Red Cross inspection. Congressional Democrats and
others, both here and abroad, have joined this week in pressing for bolder,
quicker action.

Shelling Closes Airport

Among other steps, the United States called for an extraordinary session of the
United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, perhaps as early as next week,
and Mr. Eagleburger, a former Ambassador to Yugoslavia who is Acting Secretary
during the vacation of James A. Baker 3d, said "urgent action is required to
reveal the truth and to prevent any abuses that may be occurring" in the camps.

But Mr. Eagleburger made no public appearance to add emphasis to his words,
having them read instead by a spokesman at a briefing.

Nor was there any indication that Washington was prepared to use force to insure
the reopening of the Sarajevo airport, the main conduit for relief supplies,
which was closed on Tuesday because of heavy shelling. President Bush had said
several times the United States would use military means, in concert with
others, to insure that the flow of relief was not cut off.

Eagleburger in Charge

The Administration's hesitant reactions this week are the latest expression of a
policy that has fluctuated between near silence on the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia to threats of military intervention to guarantee the delivery of
humanitarian aid.

But support has been gradually building in Washington for bolder action, and
some high-ranking government officials, mostly in the State Department and on
the National Security Council staff, are now advocating, albeit reluctantly, a
change of course.

"We are at the point now," said one such official, speaking on condition of
anonymity, "where there may well be greater danger in not taking risks than in
taking risks, and I think the President may have to roll the dice if things
don't improve. What kind of a new world order will we have if we let this set
the standard for other ethnic struggles -- war, hunger, suffering, maybe
atrocities, and the rest of the world standing by, supposedly powerless?"

In his statement, read by Richard A. Boucher, a deputy State Department
spokesman, Mr. Eagleburger said Red Cross officials had managed to visit nine
camps.

"At this point the Red Cross has reported on very difficult conditions of
detention," he said, "but they have not found any evidence of death camps."

'Profoundly Disturbing'

But he continued: "There are many reports of other detention centers which the
Red Cross has not been able to visit. And it is at some of these that the
atrocities have been reported.

"These reports, although unconfirmed, are profoundly disturbing."

Asked what would be done with any information assembled about war crimes and
their perpetrators, Mr. Boucher said he did not know. He said he knew of no
plans for a tribunal, and other officials said they doubted seriously whether
trials would take place.

Noting with approval fresh promises from Serbian leaders to open detention camps
to international inspection, Mr. Eagleburger said the United States would not
accept the excuse, often used in the past to block inspection, that the safety
of Red Cross delegates could not be guaranteed.

With Mr. Baker reportedly set to leave the State Department this month, and with
Mr. Bush on the campaign trail and relatively silent on Yugoslavia, Mr.
Eagleburger has taken charge of the issue.

Mr. Eagleburger was associated with several Yugoslav businesses while a private
citizen working with former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger from 1984 to
1988. Earlier this year he said he had "misjudged" Slobodan Milosevic, the
Serbian leader, thinking he was a person he could deal with.

Clinton Asks U.N. Session

Mr. Eagleburger's comments today did little to still the controversy.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the Democratic Presidential nominee, repeated his
call for an emergency session of the United Nations, which the President has
resisted, and suggested that air strikes be used to try to halt Serbian attacks.

"We cannot afford to ignore what appears to be a deliberate and systematic
extermination of human beings based on their ethnic origin," Mr. Clinton told an
audience of black teen-agers at a school in East St. Louis, Ill. "I would begin
with air power, against the Serbs, to try to restore the basic conditions of
humanity."

Few participants in the debate have suggested that ending the fighting, which
has been marked by extraordinary ethnic hatred, will be an easy task.

The former commander of the United Nations force in the region, Brig. Gen. Lewis
MacKenzie of Canada, has estimated that it would take more than 40,000 troops in
Sarajevo alone to keep the peace there. Unlike previous United Nations missions,
the peacekeepers have been sent into a situation where there is no peace to
keep, yet without the means to impose a peace.

Visions of Vietnam

Memories of the difficulty of fighting in Yugoslavia in World War II and the
quagmire of Vietnam have prompted the Administration to hold back on military
action. If bombing the Serbian guns failed, one Presidential aide asked, what
then? In addition, Pentagon experts speak of difficulty in finding appropriate
targets and the limited influence that the Government in Belgrade appears to
exert over the Serbian forces in Bosnia.

The politics of the day have also dictated caution. Any sizable American
involvement in the Balkans, the Republicans fear, would run against the grain of
an electorate that already suspects Mr. Bush of caring more about foreign policy
than domestic well-being.

Nor is there much support in Western Europe for trying to shock the Serbs into a
cease-fire. Prime Minister John Major said last week, "We could not unite the
international community" behind an interventionist policy.

Senators Want Action

On Capitol Hill, a bipartisan group of senators, including the leader of the
Republican minority, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, introduced a resolution
supporting the use of "all necessary means" to gain access to the detention
camps.

Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat who is among the sponsors,
said his group did not seek "all-out ground intervention" but favored limited
use of air strikes to increase the pressure on Belgrade.

Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain has joined the effort to
generate a stronger Western response. In an article on the Op-Ed page of The New
York Times, Mrs. Thatcher dismisses fears of another Vietnam as "partly
alarmism, partly an excuse for inertia." [Page A23.]

The Watchword Is Caution

But for all the pressures, the Bush Administration continues to move with
caution as its watchword.

"Once again, it's ad hoc, episodic, reluctant, almost diffident," said
Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, one of the most influential Democrats
on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Stop the Excuses. Help Bosnia Now.

BYLINE: By Margaret Thatcher;  Margaret Thatcher is former Prime Minister of
Britain.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


Terrible events are happening in Bosnia; worse ones are threatened. Sarajevo is
under constant bombardment. Gorazde is besieged and likely to fall. If it does,
a large massacre is feared and thousands of Serbian troops will be free to move
on Sarajevo, itself swollen with refugees from other areas.

The victims and losers in this conflict suffer more than the usual penalties of
defeat. Some are herded into concentration camps where, even if the worst
reports of atrocities are untrue, they nonetheless suffer appalling privation
and can be shot for insignificant offenses. Others are driven from their homes
and obliged to give up their property. Children and passers-by are shot at and
killed.

This is the Serbian "ethnic cleansing" policy -- a term for the expulsion of the
non-Serb population that combines the barbarities of Hitler's and Stalin's
policies toward other nations.

Everyone witnessing or hearing of these tragic events desperately wants them to
stop. But this feeling is exploited by Serbia and its sympathizers to press for
a U.N.-sponsored cease-fire. Reasonable as this sounds, it is an attempt to
"freeze" the present situation in which the Serbs hold about two-thirds of
Bosnia's territory, whereas they make up only 31 percent of the total population
as against 43 percent for the Muslims and 17 percent for the Croats.

Such an outcome would consolidate and ratify aggression. It was Serbia that
planned and carried out aggression against Bosnia in April. The Government of
Alija Izetbegovic in Sarajevo is the legal and internationally recognized
government of the Bosnian republic.

The pretense that Serbia has nothing to do with what goes on in Bosnia is just
that -- a pretense. From the start there has been close coordination between
supposedly independent Serbian forces in Bosnia and the Serbian high command in
Belgrade, which is providing financial and military means for the war --
including the all-important gasoline for the Serbian forces.

It is argued by some that nothing can be done by the West unless we are prepared
to risk permanent involvement in a Vietnam- or Lebanon-style conflict and
potentially high Western casualties. That is partly alarmism, partly an excuse
for inertia. There is a vast difference between a full-scale land invasion like
Desert Storm, and a range of military interventions from lifting the arms
embargo on Bosnia, through supplying arms to Bosnian forces, to direct strikes
on military targets and communications.

Even if the West passes by on the other side, we cannot expect that others will
do so. There is increasing alarm in Turkey and the Muslim world. More massacres
of Muslims in Bosnia, terrible in themselves, would also risk the conflict
spreading.

Serbia has no powerful outside backers, such as the Soviet Union in the past. It
has up to now been encouraged by Western inaction, not least by explicit
statements that force would not be used. A clear threat of military action would
force Serbia into contemplating an end to its aggression. Serbia should be given
an ultimatum to comply with certain Western demands:

* Cessation of Serbia's economic support for the war in Bosnia to be monitored
by international observers placed on the Serb-Bosnian border.

* Recognition of Bosnia's independence and territorial integrity by Belgrade and
renunciation of territorial claims against it.

* Guarantees of access from Serbia and Bosnia for humanitarian teams.

* Agreement to the demilitarization of Bosnia within a broader demilitarization
agreement for the whole region.

* Promise of cooperation with the return of refugees to Bosnia.

If those demands (which should be accompanied by a deadline) are not met,
military retaliation should follow, including aerial bombardment of bridges on
the Drina linking Bosnia with Serbia, of military convoys, of gun positions
around Sarajevo and Gorazde, and of military stores and other installations
useful in the war. It should also be made clear that while this is not a war
against the Serbian people, even installations on the Serbian side of the border
may be attacked if they play an important role in the war.

American leadership in this endeavor is indispensable, as the E.C.'s paralysis
has shown. But America cannot be expected to act alone. NATO, which is the most
practical instrument to hand, must deal with the crisis. It is not "out of
area."

The West's ultimate aim should be the restoration of the Bosnian state, backed
by international guarantees within a regional pact, perhaps under C.S.C.E.
supervision, and guaranteeing the rights of the three main groups in Bosnia (but
not allowing for its partition into three cantons).

Such a solution would prevent the irredentist wars that the partition of the
country between Serbia and Croatia would inevitably provoke. Also, keeping the
Muslims in a united Bosnia would discourage their radicalization, which would be
inevitable if the Muslims were to be dispersed under alien rule. A desperate
Muslim diaspora -- not unlike the Palestinian one -- could then turn to
terrorism. Europe would have created an Islamic time bomb.

Serbia will not listen until forced to listen. Only the prospect of resistance
and defeat will lead to the rise of a more democratic and peaceful leadership.
Waiting until the conflict burns itself out will be not only dishonorable but
also very costly: refugees, terrorism, Balkan wars drawing in other countries
and worse.

Hesitation has already proved costly. The matter is urgent. There are perhaps a
few weeks left for a serious initiative before it is too late and a Serb victory
is accomplished, with terrible long-term consequences.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Balkan Scenes Stir Europe, But Action Remains Elusive

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1249 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 7


Scenes of sealed trains, emaciated inmates of prison camps and women and
children fleeing "ethnic cleansing" operations in the Balkans have begun to stir
European consciences with ugly reminders of the Nazi brutality of half a century
ago.

With many people horrified that some parts of Europe are still capable of
falling back so deeply into the nationalist abyss, there have been calls in
France and Britain for European leaders to show more determination to stand up
against Serbian aggression in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as most of them stood up
against Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait two years ago.

But there have been no mass petitions of protest against the atrocities, no
marches in the streets of Paris or London demanding action, and little sign that
the European leaders will harden their stand against the violence in the
Balkans.

Until the latest reports of atrocities, the guns of August in Sarajevo have not
had the resonance in 1992 that they had in 1914. Then, the Balkans marked the
flashpoint at which empires and the interests of rival European powers collided.
But today no Western European country feels obliged to defend the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, though all the European Community nations
are agreed not to recognize its dismemberment.

Their constituents have been left to wring their hands collectively. In Germany,
where the feelings of guilt may be greatest because of that country's past
contributions to inhumanity in the Balkans, there has been the biggest influx of
refugees since the collapse of Communism in 1989. And in every European country,
newspapers and magazines have been calling more and more insistently for more
effective ways of preventing history from repeating itself.

"Something must be done -- but what?" Britain's Daily Telegraph summed up on
Wednesday. For most Europeans, it said, the answer is "not much."

"One can try to isolate Serbia completely, and bomb their artillery positions as
a last resort," said Klaus Harpprecht, a German author who was an adviser to
Willy Brandt when he was Chancellor. "But I'm doubtful about sending in an
intervention force.  And as long as there is no combined European intervention
force, I think Germans can't move into any territory where they were in World
War II. It wouldn't be decent."

Many ordinary people share the same view. "When I see these atrocities I am just
speechless," said Stephanie Heussner, 22 years old, who lives near Bonn. "But we
can't interfere because then it will just add violence to violence."

Colette Barbey, a widow who is spending the holiday in eastern France, said:
"It's shocking to realize that such barbarity is possible in Europe today. It
makes you realize that it could happen in almost any European country."

Bernard-Henri Levy, a French writer and philosopher who visited Sarajevo in
mid-June, was even more emphatic. "This is a war in the heart of Europe, the
first real war in Europe since the Second World War," he said. "If Europeans go
away on their vacations and pretend that it doesn't concern them, this will be
suicidal."

British Leader Under Pressure

In the absence of a clear lead from governments, the European debate about what
to do has been taking place mainly on the nightly television programs and in the
newspapers. Most of these, especially since the reports of prison camps began to
emerge over the last few days, have been heavily critical of the Serbian
nationalists whom most governments here blame for the worst atrocities, though
they recognize that Croats and Muslims have also not been blameless.

But so far the only European leader who has come under much pressure to do more
has been Prime Minister John Major of Britain, which now holds the rotating
presidency of the 12-nation European Community. He has called an international
peace conference on Yugoslavia here Aug. 26-28, but has repeatedly ruled out
using NATO troops to go in and stop the violence in the Balkans, a step demanded
by his predecessor, Margaret Thatcher, this week.

"Every time we say that force will not be used, we encourage the aggressor, who
has already caused 2.5 million people to flee their homes," she said on
Wednesday, calling for "military help within days" to save the Bosnians. Similar
calls have come from two other British politicians, former Foreign Secretary
David Owen and the leader of the opposition Liberal Democrats, Paddy Ashdown.

Britain Now Weighs 'Options'

Mr. Major explicitly rejected the calls from Lord Owen and Mr. Ashdown, saying
the use of force would bring "disproportionate risk to the lives of civilians
and our armed forces." Today he said, "We have been looking at a whole series of
options over the last few days."

He did not say what proposals he would make when he opened the peace conference,
but the European Community-sponsored peace talks on Bosnia have concentrated on
ways of partitioning the country into three ethnic cantons. Mr. Major said in
his response to Mr. Ashdown that the option of creating safe havens for
refugees, a step that was taken for the Kurds in Iraq after the Persian Gulf
war, was receiving "detailed attention."

But Bishop Karl Lehmann, speaking for the German Conference of Catholic Bishops,
called for parishes all over the country to provide living space for refugees
from the former Yugoslavia. After the evening television news showed reports of
a sealed train full of Bosnian refugees held up in Croatia because no country
would give them visas, Germany agreed to take in 10,200 Bosnians, in addition to
the 215,000 refugees it has admitted from the former Yugoslavia since the
fighting began.

Press reports are also shaping the debate in France.

"To every man, every chief of state, every nation, Auschwitz left this message:
never to tolerate the possibility of the massacre of any people when there is
the slightest possibility of intervening," Jacques Lesourne warned in Le Monde
on Thursday. "Since the hint that extermination has been going on in camps
controlled by the Serbs, the nature of the Yugoslav crisis has changed."

The next day, France said it would ask the United Nations to send more troops to
former Yugoslav republics to insure protection for aid convoys.

One of the most reasoned arguments for intervention against Serbian nationalists
came from a British journalist, Martin Woollacott of The Guardian, a man whose
experience of covering wars goes back to Vietnam. "The aim in Yugoslavia ought
to be to injure the regime which is most responsible for the continuing
violence, and that is the Serbian regime," he wrote.

"They don't take towns by assault, preferring to beat them gradually to death at
no cost to themselves," Mr. Woollacott said. "They take no precautions against
attack, because they have almost never been attacked."

"Serbia is weak, militarily, economically, politically and morally," he
continued. "We ought at least to entertain the possibility that they would run
away in fear instead of assuming that they would leap behind a bush and then
re-emerge as reincarnations of Second World War partisans."

An Appeal by Le Carre

The British author David Cornwell, better known as John Le Carre, said, "We have
to go in."

"Where is Western leadership, as opposed to Western show business?" he asked.
"How do we cajole our statesmen into speaking for the humanity of the decent
people they represent?

"We are much, much better than this, and our leaders should know it."

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bosnian refugees in Den Bosch, the Netherlands, watching a
report on a northern Bosnia prison camp. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 8, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Bush Says Any U.S. Action Must Come Through U.N.

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 7


President Bush vowed today that he would not rest until Serbian-run prison camps
were opened to outside inspection, but he stopped short of threatening to bomb
Serbian positions and targets to gain access.

On the question of military action to keep relief supplies flowing, which the
United States is pressing the United Nations to authorize, Mr. Bush insisted
that any American involvement must be part of a United Nations effort. But the
British and the French are both resisting a United Nations authorization vote.

"We are -- everyone has been -- reluctant for very understandable reasons to use
force," the President told reporters in the White House briefing room, as calls
for action mounted at home and abroad. "There's a lot of voices out there in the
United States today that say use force, but they don't have the responsibility
for sending somebody else's son or somebody else's daughter into harm's way, and
I do."

Not in 'Political Arena'

That sounded like a jab at Gov. Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential
nominee, who has been advocating air strikes. But Mr. Bush insisted, "I am not
going to get engaged in the political arena" on the subject of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav republic that has been under Serbian attack.

Still, the President's discussion with the reporters was full of political spin.
He implied strongly that only he, and not Mr. Clinton, was qualified to weigh
the alternatives in the Balkans, and he said he would continue to "speak with
measured confidence" in his dealings with Iraq -- a pair of comments in keeping
with his campaign theme of "trust and experience."

He interpreted a slight fall in the nation's unemployment rate, which most
private economists called rather insignificant, as evidence that the country was
"poised for recovery."

Later, at a ceremony marking the 50th anniversary of the start of the battle of
Guadalcanal in the South Pacific, the electioneering tone continued.

Praised by Cheney

Introducing the President, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney noted that Mr. Bush had
fought in World War II, then praised him as a wartime leader: "When this nation
faced the challenge to freedom in the Persian Gulf, he stood up for America's
principles. He refused to reward aggression. That's because he understands, just
as the veterans of Guadalcanal understand, the precious value of freedom."

Mr. Clinton has been criticized in some quarters for having managed to avoid
combat service in Vietnam. Mr. Cheney did not serve there, either.

In his discussion of the ethnic strife in the Balkans, Mr. Bush emphasized that
he had made no decision yet about military action against Serbian troops
bombarding the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, or against targets on Serbian
territory.

Referring to the Vietnam war, the President added: "We are thinking it out very
carefully. I do not want to see the United States bogged down in any way into
some guerrilla warfare.  We've lived through that once already."

Stung by Thatcher Article

Senior White House officials said that Mr. Bush had been stung by an article in
The New York Times on Thursday, written by his old ally, former Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher of Britain. It bore the headline, "Stop the Excuses. Help
Bosnia Now." But the President was said to be haunted by the prospect of Vietnam
-style escalation, in which failure of a bombing campaign would be followed by
calls for the commitment of substantial allied ground forces.

"The world cannot shed its horror at the prospect of concentration camps," Mr.
Bush said in his second such statement in two days."The shocking brutality of
genocide in World War II, in those concentration camps, are burning memories for
all of us, and that can't happen again. And we will not rest until the
international community has gained access to any and all detention camps."

Refugees from northern Bosnia have told interviewers of rapes, killings and
starvation diets in Serbian-run prison camps, and television footage has shown
gaunt figures with ribs protruding in scenes reminiscent of Nazi concentration
camps.

In Iraq, a new United Nations weapons inspection team has arrived and repeated
its demand to inspect any site it chooses under the terms of the cease-fire in
the Persian Gulf War. But President Saddam Hussein says they will be barred from
entering any Government ministry because that would compromise Iraqi
sovereignty.

With deadlock looming once again, Mr. Bush said he could not tell yet "how much
of this is bluster" and "how much on their part is determination to provoke
confrontation." But he insisted that Mr. Hussein "is going to comply" with all
of the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Asked if the problems overseas might make it more difficult to bring Secretary
of State James A. Baker 3d into the White House to oversee his re-election
campaign, as expected, the President replied, "When I have something to say
about what Secretary Baker might or might not do, I'll let everybody here know
about it, but I have great confidence in him and in the department on the
diplomatic side."

Aides said Mr. Baker's changeover might be delayed until late this month, but
was still planned.

Speaking to reporters in LaCrosse, Wis., this morning, Mr. Clinton offered
careful, limited praise of the President's statements on the Balkan situation.

"I think it's a step in the right direction," he said. "I think it's time they
contemplated air support."

Asked if he believed that the United States should push for broadening the air
support mission to include the bombing of artillery positions that have been
shelling civilian areas, Mr. Clinton said: "I think they need to look at their
military options, whether they can actually do that in Bosnia without taking a
lot of civilian casualties, too. I think we ought to wait until we get some
sense of what is posssible, but I think that is where they ought to be
thinking."

Mr. Bush said he had no problem with Mr. Clinton's "offering advice on these
matters," but said he was "not going to get engaged in the political arena when
we are trying to do something that really has a tremendous humanitarian aspect."
Foreign policy, he said, was too serious for politics.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNDER THE GUN;
In Sarajevo, the Cavalry Seems Far Away

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina


THE climb up the mountain took 40 minutes, along a winding forest path that
seemed close to vertical at times. In peacetime it was a route for hikers, an
ascent up Trebevic Mountain on the southeastern flank of Sarajevo that led to
the bobsled run built for the 1984 Winter Olympic Games. But now it is the way
to the front for some of the fighters in Bosnia's ragtag army, men in jeans and
running shoes with too few Kalashnikov rifles to go around and ammunition so
scarce that one of their band clambered up the mountainside with a steel tray
carrying a few precious hand grenades and cardboard boxes of spare
7.62-millimeter bullets.

Nobody talked much during the climb, and at the bunkers about halfway up the
mountain it was plain to see why. For two weeks, these men had been contesting a
few hundred yards of ground, pushing forward to a position above the bobsled
run, then being forced back down again by mortar and tank fire. Some of their
fellow fighters' bodies still lay on higher ground, too exposed to risk attempts
at recovery. In the mortuary at the Kosevo Hospital complex, other Bosnian
fighters killed on Trebevic were laid out two to a steel-topped morgue table,
some of them on the floor, almost all killed by shrapnel from shells. One had
his throat cut, apparently a victim of a gruesome practice among Serbian
nationalist irregulars of using long-bladed knives to kill their enemies.

This is the character of the fight raging for Sarajevo, the besieged city that
President Bush vowed last week to bring relief to -- but only in limited ways
designed to help the civilian population, not the fighting men on the hills. And
in this city, there is grave doubt that such humanitarian aid would do anything
more than alleviate the effects of the Serbian attacks on the city without doing
anything to end the attacks.

For the men defending Sarajevo -- taxi drivers and lawyers, rock guitarists and
plumbers, 16-year-old boys and men in their mid-50's -- the reality of combat is
that for four months, keeping this city of 400,000 people from being overrun has
meant fighting against every possible disadvantage. They have held off an
attacking force that has the tanks and artillery of the Serbian-led Yugoslav
Army, thousands of skilled officers and enlisted men, and virtually limitless
ammunition. But above all, it has meant fighting uphill, from a city cradled in
a bowl of mountains rising to 6,800 feet. All the way up the mountainsides, and
all around the city, are the Serbian heavy guns, in well-fortified bunkers with
a view of the city that makes bombardment about as taxing as shooting fish in a
barrel.

For those seeking to break the siege, and save the multi-national,
multi-religious society of Sarajevo from the nationalist paroxysm, it is a
strategic nightmare. And it is into this ghastly situation that President Bush
and his advisers are more and more being drawn, to the point that Mr. Bush
announced last week that he would seek authorization from the United Nations
Security Council for the deployment of American and other foreign forces. Even
that limited position quickly drew skeptical questioning from Britain and
France, however, despite the fact that Mr. Bush made his move with elaborate
qualifications, the essential one being that foreign forces would be used only
to assist in protecting convoys of relief supplies for civilians. These are
convoys that the United Nations and other international agencies want to run
overland to Sarajevo and other embattled communities from points outside Bosnia,
principally the Adriatic port of Split, 125 miles west of Sarajevo in Croatia.

Military Options

The options that were reported to be under review in Washington and within NATO
last week included putting troops on the ground inside Bosnia (although it is
unclear which countries would be willing to contribute such troops) to protect
against the ambushes and land mines and hijackings that have been common
whenever relief supplies have been moved overland. Another possibility is the
use of helicopter gunships to overfly the winding mountain roads leading from
Split and Zagreb, the Croatian capital. Some helicopter gunships are already
stationed off the Croatian coast aboard a NATO flotilla dispatched to watch
ships that might try to defy the United Nations trade embargo on Serbia.

What Mr. Bush and other Western leaders were continuing to make clear last week
is that they have no intention of being drawn deeper into the war, as they would
be if a decision were taken to come to the Bosnian forces' rescue. Instead, they
cling to a hope that if Sarajevo and other besieged communities can be
sustained, there remains a chance for a negotiated settlement between Bosnians
and Serbs.

Pentagon officials have said that contingency planning makes no provision for
the two kinds of assistance repeatedly requested by the Bosnian Government:
American air strikes against the Serbian gun positions around Sarajevo and
against the airfields in north-central Bosnia and outside Belgrade, the Serbian
capital, from which Yugoslav fighter-bombers have flown sorties against
Sarajevo; and an airlift of American arms that would even out a battlefield
imbalance that President Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian leader, has said is now
overwhelming.

The reasoning in Washington and in London, where Prime Minister John Major has
led European leaders in a determination not to get drawn into the fighting, is
that a disaster on a Vietnam scale awaits those who would cross the line between
insuring humanitarian relief for Bosnia's civilians, and military actions to
punish the Serbian forces. Taking their cue from Maj. Gen. Lewis W. MacKenzie of
Canada, the United Nations military commander here until recently, Western
planners have cited Bosnia's mountainous terrain, a history of guerrilla warfare
by Bosnian Serbs dating to World War II, and the difficulty in defining precise
military objectives after thousands of towns and villages have been seized by
Serbs, "cleansed" of Muslims and Croats, and, in many cases, razed.

But in Sarajevo, many feel that Mr. Bush and his allies have fashioned a straw
man. In an interview Friday, Mr. Izetbegovic became irritated when discussing
the position Mr. Bush is taking. As Mr. Izetbegovic noted, Bosnia's Government
has never suggested the deployment of Western ground troops. As for anxieties
about a new Vietnam, Mr. Izetbegovic said: "I don't see how air strikes could
lead to a new Vietnam. I think this talk about Vietnam is just an excuse, a
pretext for not doing anything. People who use this analogy are simply playing
on the traumas of the American people."

Appeasement?

As many Bosnians see it, Western intermediaries who have shuttled through here
urging the Bosnian leaders to halt their attempts to break the Sarajevo siege
and to accept a negotiated settlement are preaching appeasement. The Bosnians
point out that any settlement now would leave the Serbs occupying two-thirds of
Bosnia, and would almostcertainly involve the surrender of large parts of
Sarajevo to the separate "Serbian state" established by their adversaries. It
would also leave the Serbian nationalist leaders unpunished for a growing
catalog of human rights abuses, from the "ethnic cleansing" offensives that have
driven more than a million Muslims from their homes to the scores of Serbian
detention camps where thousands of Muslims have been imprisoned and, according
to some accounts, subjected to torture and executions. And it would leave
unavenged the destruction of Sarajevo.

As for the military options under review by the United States and its allies,
many here, fighters and civilians alike, were saying last week that Mr. Bush and
other Western leaders had reasoned themselves into a muddle. Many here have seen
the United Nations relief airlift to the Sarajevo airport, which has supplied
less than 7 percent of the city's normal food needs, as a measure fashioned more
to assuage troubled Western consciences than to deal with the core of the
problem here, the relentless Serbian attacks on civilians. To put Western ground
troops in here to support overland relief columns, in this view, would be to
move further down a path that has been described here as "feeding the dead."

Not everybody here is confident that American bombing would make the crucial
difference, or that the arms supplies sought by the Bosnians would enable them
to turn the tide of the war. But when they listen to the Pentagon's warnings
about fierce Serbian resistance, many here recall the forecasts two years ago
that Iraqi troops would fight well in Kuwait. Many Serbian gunners are
conscripts, and they and the paramilitary bands that support them have shown,
since the Serbian war in Croatia last year, that their courage grows from the
barrels of their heavy guns and not from any evident willingness to fight their
adversaries on even terms. According to one estimate by a senior Bosnian
military official, the current strength of the Serbian forces in the Sarajevo
area is, in any event, only about 7,000 men, not much more than the number of
Bosnian defenders. Relying on such calculations of their opponents' cowardice,
many Sarajevans are quick to express a belief that the arrival of American jets
over the Serbian guns would break the attackers' morale and send them hastening
for the safety of Serbia. In any case, these Sarajevans say, if the bombing
failed, nobody could stay the Western world had stood passively by, watching
Sarajevo die.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Sarajevo showing key Serbian and Bosnian positions.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Senator Thomas J. McIntyre, a New Hampshire Democrat, 77

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 537 words


Thomas J. McIntyre, a Democrat who became an influential Senator from a
Republican state, died yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach,
Fla. He was 77 years old and lived in Laconia, N.H., and Tequista, Fla.

He died of Alzheimer's disease, pneumonia and heart failure, his family said.

Mr. McIntyre scored a historic upset in 1962 as the first Democrat in 30 years
elected to the Senate in New Hampshire, a fabled Republican bastion. He made
history in 1966 as the first Democratic Senator in the state's history to be
re-elected. He also won in 1972 but was defeated in 1978.

From Hawk to Dove

In the national tumult of 1968, he was co-chairman of President Lyndon B.
Johnson's campaign in New Hampshire, the first primary. Mr. McIntyre denounced
Mr. Johnson's Democratic challenger, Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota, as
an "appeaser." But Mr. McCarthy's surprisingly strong showing embarrassed the
President, who announced shortly afterward that he would not seek re-election.

Originally an avowed hawk on Vietnam, Mr. McIntyre announced a change of heart
in 1969, saying, "Our nation is tearing itself apart."

Serving as a subcommittee chairman on the Banking and Armed Services Committees,
he earned a liberal reputation. When the John Birch Society rated him the worst
Senator, he said, "I must be doing something right."

He advocated arms control, national health care, restrictions on aerosol
chemicals to protect the ozone layer, a ban on price fixing in stock fees, solar
energy and reduced Government paperwork. He wrote the law creating share-draft
checking accounts for savings institutions. On a divided committee, he voted for
New York City's loan guarantees.

Opposed Bush for C.I.A.

He caused a stir in 1967 by criticizing investment managers and by showing he
could beat their recommendations by literally throwing darts at stock listings.

He was also the floor manager of a losing effort to block George Bush's
confirmation as Director of Central Intelligence in 1976. He argued that
appointing the former national Republican chairman would politicize the agency
in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal.

His 1978 defeat by Gordon J. Humphrey, a Republican, resulted from his support
of the Panama Canal Treaty and abortion rights, overconfidence from a poll
showing him leading 2 to 1, opposition from one of the state's leading
newspaper's, The Manchester Union Leader, and its publisher, William Loeb, and
Mr. Humphrey's introduction of Boston television commercials into New Hampshire
politics.

Afterwards, Mr. McIntyre was a coauthor of "The Fear Brokers" (Pilgrim Press,
1979), about what he called "the bully boys of the radical New Right."

Born in Laconia, he was a graduate of Dartmouth College and the Boston College
law school. In World War II he served in the Army in Europe, reaching the rank
of major and winning a Bronze Star.

He returned to Laconia to practice law and own rental buildings, then was
elected Mayor from 1949-51, the only elective office he held before being
elected to the Senate.

Surviving are his wife of 51 years, the former Myrtle Clement; a daughter,
Martha G. McIntyre of Gilford, N.H., and a grandson.

NAME: Thomas J. McIntyre

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas A. McIntyre (The New York Times, 1972)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Official Sees M.I.A. Searches as Spying

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 664 words


Charging that the United States is making "excessive" demands in its search for
servicemen still unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, Hanoi's chief delegate to
the United Nations said yesterday that the Vietnamese had begun to fear that
American inspections of prisons and archives are cloaks for espionage.

"It seems that the intention of the U.S. side is not only seeking M.I.A.
information, but also seeking something else -- for example, information on the
internal situation of Vietnam, state secrets of Vietnam," said Trinh Xuan Lang,
Hanoi's top envoy in the United States in the absence of diplomatic relations.

Mr. Lang said in an interview at his Manhattan residence that his remarks
reflected public opinion in Vietnam.

But Americans who have close ties to Hanoi through private organizations say
officials in some ministries and a faction of the Communist Party leadership
wary of American influence have used what they consider the intrusiveness of the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue to justify and promote their hard-line positions, which are
not shared by the general public.

Mr. Lang said that of particular concern to officials in Hanoi were repeated
requests for "short notice" searches of prisons and sites to follow up reports
that Caucasians believed to be Americans had been spotted alive.

He said that under new agreements reached this year with President Bush's
special envoy, Gen. John W. Vessey, and the former Assistant Secretary of State
for East Asia, Richard Solomon, Hanoi had joined in 35 live-sighting searches,
including 6 on short notice and 5 in prisons.

"All those investigations have proved that all the information on live sightings
given by the U.S. side was inaccurate, incorrect, false," he said.

Mr. Lang's comments reflect Hanoi's exasperation that progress toward the
establishment of relations with the United States, which would unlock the door
to American investment and participation in development, has been set back over
the last few months by a series of events.

These include still-unproven Russian allegations that Vietnam may have held
Americans after the United States troop withdrawal in 1973 and may have turned
over some to Moscow.

Mr. Lang implied that President Boris N. Yeltsin's statements in June that
Vietnam veterans could still be alive in the former Soviet republics could have
been made for political reasons.

"The M.I.A. issue is a very emotional, sensitive and complex issue," he said.
"Nobody should be allowed to use that issue for his own profit because it would
affect the sentiments of the American people as well as the Vietnamese people."

Hearings by the Senate Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs have also served to
reopen the issue to Hanoi's disadvantage.

Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire and the committee's deputy
chairman, publicly repeated his belief in hearings last week that Hanoi had
maintained an underground prison in a Defense Ministry compound near the
mausoleum of Ho Chi Minh. Mr. Lang called the charge "a myth and an affront to
the people of Vietnam."

At a recent technical meeting between the leaders of the joint search
operations, Mr. Lang edged, Vietnam put forward what he called "suggestions" on
how future searches, particularly in live-sighting cases, should be conducted.

He said Hanoi had no intention of withdrawing cooperation, but was asking only
to be involved in deciding on the merits of cases before searches were ordered.
He did seem to all but rule out short-notice investigations, however.

Pentagon and State Department officials want to continue the practice to avoid
criticism that potential evidence can be moved out of the way if the Vietnamese
have days or weeks to get ready for an inspection.

"Relations between our two countries have been taken hostage in the hands of
some strong M.I.A. lobbies," he said. "So it is up to the lobbyists whether the
United States and Vietnam have relations or not. That cannot be accepted."

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words



International    A2-9

ISRAEL CHANGES STANCE ON P.L.O.

The new Israeli Government said it would press for changes in the law
prohibiting Israelis from having any contact with the Palestine Liberation
Organization. One senior official called the law "stupid." A1

Jewish settlers acted in defiance of the Israeli Government.  A7

A SECOND SARAJEVO?

In the northwestern corner of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbian forces are cutting
food deliveries and escape routes for 300,000 people. Some relief workers fear
that Bihac, the largest city in the Muslim enclave, will be consumed by
violence.  A1

WHAT PRICE PEACE?

News Analysis: Not one Western leader has yet determined what price should be
paid, in Western lives and money, to halt the barbarity in what used to be
Yugoslavia.  A8

ALLIES MAP BALKAN PLAN

After talks among with France and Britain, United States officials said an
agreement was near on a Security Council resolution to authorize "all necessary
means" to deliver food and medicine to Bosnia.  A8

CLINTON ON THE CAMPS

The Democratic Presidential nominee said the United States should consider using
military force to open Serbian detention camps and should also weigh lifting
arms embargos against Bosnia and Croatia.  A8

BIRTH PANGS IN SLOVAKIA

As the union of Czechs and Slovaks heads toward its end, opposition politicians
in Slovakia fear the nationalist leader is showing signs of authoritarianism.
A3

LEFT OUT AFTER INDEPENDENCE

Many people who helped in the struggle for Estonia's independence have been left
without a state: They are non-Estonians, members of other ethnic groups who
cannot vote or own property.  A9

Thousands flee Afghanistan's capital as fighting continues.  A5

Discord at the top has the World Health Organization in turmoil.  A3

U.N. inspects a site in Iraq.  A3

From Nigeria, a call for reparations for the slave trade.  A2

Karachi Journal: The ordeal of a poet and social campaigner.  A4

National    A10-14

CONTROLLING THE CONVENTION

Republicans have plotted for weeks for their convention in Houston. But beneath
all the plans for images and theatrics, is a single serious goal: to prevent the
event from becoming a review of President Bush's campaign problems.  A1

BUSH REUSES FEAR TACTICS

Struggling to revive his campaign, President Bush is returning to his strategy
of 1988, portraying himself as the less scary candidate.  A14

REPUBLICANS CALL FOR TAX CUTS

Seven leading Republican conservatives urged President Bush's campaign to adopt
a platform that would include tax cuts and limits on growth of entitlement
spending.  A14

A PREDATOR'S RETURN

The Rocky Mountain gray wolf is again roaming western Montana, and its return
under Federal protection offers a test of how far society is prepared to go to
accept a feared predator.  A1

HILLARY CLINTON ADDRESSES A.B.A.

At the annual meeting of the American Bar Association, Hillary Clinton
celebrated the recent advances of women in the legal profession.  A10

RACIAL TURMOIL IN A TEXAS CITY

Blacks and whites in Tyler, Tex. have lived together quietly for years. But now
several cases of perceived injustice by the police and the courts has broken the
quiet.  A10

NEW WRINKLE IN AIDS DISPUTE

A disagreement between French and British researchers over who should get credit
for early research on AIDS may have implications for the French Government's
effort to renegotiate a patent royalty agreement with the United States.  A11

QE2 STEAMS TOWARD BOSTON

The Queen Elizabeth 2, a 74-foot gash in its hull, began steaming toward Boston
as American and British investigators prepared for a hearing into why the ship
hit an underwater obstacle.  A12

A CALLING IN CONGRESS

Washington at Work: Senator John Kerry, who played an active role in the antiwar
movement 20 years ago, knew he could not walk away the issue of missing
Americans in Vietnam.  A13


Southwestern Bell and Bell South reached pacts with unions.  A15

Metro Digest    B1

CAR THEFT AS CHILD'S PLAY

Car theft in Newark and neighboring cities has reached epidemic proportions.
Even the most youthful thieves -- some are as young as 9 years old -- can
penetrate any barrier and be behind the wheel in a matter of seconds.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Arts/Entertainment    C13-18

A challenge for Marisa Tomei.  C13

Music: "Der Rosenkavalier" at Santa Fe.  C13

Critic's Notebook: Tanglewood makes room for rock.  C13

Jazz meets tap.  C13

The Duke Ellington sound.  C18

Dance: In Review C14

Word and Image:

"Crazy in Love." C16

"Young Men and Fire." C18

Sports    C1-12

THE OLYMPICS IN RETROSPECT

The Olympic Games presented a host of themes -- fading amateurism, rampant
commercialism, political reordering, questionable sportsmanship and an
occasional triumph of the human spirit. But nothing will be more identifiable
with the Barcelona Games than the super-celebrities of the Dream Team.  A1

Baseball: Yankee rookie masterful in debut.  C9

Cubs topple Mets.  C9

Tigers romp over Blue Jays.  C9

Glavine, Braves keep rolling.  C9

Columns:

Anderson on Cuban sports.  C2

Vecsey on Barcelona.  C4

Features: Sidelines C2

Football: Giants win exhibition opener.  C11

Jets' rusher making comeback.  C11

Golf: Daly rests on one laurel.  C12

Olympics:

South Korean wins marathon.  C3

Ben Johnson is ejected.  C3

Coach a mystery but Cuban boxers aren't.  C1

Bird and Johnson ponder their futures.  C3

Obituaries B6

Ayatollah Khoei, leading scholar of Shiite Islam.

Thomas J. McIntyre, former Democratic Senator of New Hampshire.

Reinout P. Kroon, engineer who

developed American jet engine.

Editorials/Op-Ed    A16-17

Editorials

A new opening for Times Square.
America isn't Asia's cop.
David Shipley: Herbert Hoover.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Record of contempt.

Michael Crichton: Time for tough talk in the land of the rising sun.

David R. Carlin Jr.: The tyranny of the pro-choice snobs.

Steve H. Hanke: The Fed is a failure, so let's get rid of it.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Senator Thomas J. McIntyre, a New Hampshire Democrat, 77

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


Thomas J. McIntyre, a Democrat who became an influential Senator from New
Hampshire, a fabled Republican bastion, died yesterday at Good Samaritan
Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla. He was 77 years old and lived in Laconia,
N.H., and Tequista, Fla.

He died of Alzheimer's disease, pneumonia and heart failure, his family said.

Mr. McIntyre scored a historic upset in 1962 as the first Democrat in 30 years
elected to the Senate in New Hampshire. He made history in 1966 as the first
Democratic Senator in the state's history to be re-elected. He also won in 1972
but was defeated in 1978.

From Hawk to Dove

In the national tumult of 1968, he was co-chairman of President Lyndon B.
Johnson's campaign in New Hampshire, the first primary. Mr. McIntyre denounced
Mr. Johnson's Democratic challenger, Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota, as
an "appeaser." But Mr. McCarthy's surprisingly strong showing embarrassed the
President, who announced shortly afterward that he would not seek re-election.

Originally an avowed hawk on Vietnam, Mr. McIntyre announced a change of heart
in 1969, saying, "Our nation is tearing itself apart."

Serving as a subcommittee chairman on the Banking and Armed Services Committees,
he earned a liberal reputation. When the John Birch Society rated him the worst
Senator, he said, "I must be doing something right."

He advocated arms control, national health care, restrictions on aerosol
chemicals to protect the ozone layer, a ban on price fixing in stock fees, solar
energy and reduced Government paperwork. He wrote the law creating share-draft
checking accounts for savings institutions. On a divided committee, he voted for
New York City's loan guarantees.

Opposed Bush for C.I.A.

He caused a stir in 1967 by criticizing investment managers and by showing he
could beat their recommendations by literally throwing darts at stock listings.

He was also the floor manager of a losing effort to block George Bush's
confirmation as Director of Central Intelligence in 1976. He argued that
appointing the former national Republican chairman would politicize the agency
in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal.

His 1978 defeat by Gordon J. Humphrey, a Republican, resulted from his support
of the Panama Canal Treaty and abortion rights, overconfidence from a poll
showing him leading 2 to 1, opposition from one of the state's leading
newspaper's, The Manchester Union Leader, and its publisher, William Loeb, and
Mr. Humphrey's introduction of Boston television commercials into New Hampshire
politics.

Afterwards, Mr. McIntyre was a coauthor of "The Fear Brokers" (Pilgrim Press,
1979), about what he called "the bully boys of the radical New Right."

Born in Laconia, he was a graduate of Dartmouth College and the Boston College
law school. In World War II he served in the Army in Europe, reaching the rank
of major and winning a Bronze Star.

He returned to Laconia to practice law and own rental buildings, then was
elected Mayor from 1949-51, the only elective office he held before being
elected to the Senate.

Surviving are his wife of 51 years, the former Myrtle Clement; a daughter,
Martha G. McIntyre of Gilford, N.H., and a grandson.

NAME: Thomas J. McIntyre

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas J. McIntyre (The New York Times, 1972)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

America Isn't Asia's Cop

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


The Soviet threat is ended. America has been able to scale down radically its
troop strength in Europe. But in Asia, apart from the unplanned base closings in
the Philippines, U.S. forces remain in place -- including 40,000 each in South
Korea and and Japan.

Political and budgetary pressures will rightly tempt the next President to scale
down these troop levels. A smaller U.S. military garrison makes good sense,
provided Washington also works to build up a new system of regional collective
security. Such a system would provide the best insurance against conflicts
between Asian states as Japan raises its military profile in the region.

Worrisome conflicts are already taking shape. China and Korea are unhappy about
rising Japanese defense budgets and a new law that permits Japanese military
units to join U.N. peacekeeping operations. Today's Japan is not militaristic
and lacks long-range weapons. But that doesn't reassure Asian victims of past
Japanese aggression.

Seoul and Beijing will soon establish formal diplomatic ties. There is a danger
that they might go on to fashion a military alliance that could isolate and
provoke Japan.

North Korea's secretive nuclear program also threatens regional security. Unless
South Korea can satisfy itself that Pyongyang isn't building a bomb, Seoul may
reconsider its own renunciation of nuclear weapons. A Japan faced with four
nuclear neighbors -- Russia, China and the two Koreas -- would undoubtedly feel
pressure to go nuclear too.

Russia and Japan, meanwhile, remain locked in a territorial dispute left over
from World War II. And China now rattles its neighbors by asserting sovereignty
over islands claimed by Vietnam, Malaysia, the Philippines, Brunei and Taiwan.

These problems could be resolved through a new regional security organization
that would include Japan, China and South Korea as well as Russia and the United
States. As things now stand, aggrieved parties typically lobby for America's
support. That could begin to put Washington in ticklish situations. But in a
collective security arrangement, a natural forum for direct talks would be
created. Washington would not feel compelled to take sides.

Members of Asean, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, also might want to
participate. And diplomatic outcasts like Vietnam and Taiwan might eventually be
brought in. A regional security organization might even become a modest force
for democratization by subjecting each member's military forces to a healthy
degree of outside accountability.

Even before the cold war ended, the mission of U.S. forces in the Pacific had
shifted from containing Communism to keeping potential Asian rivals at arm's
length from each other. There's no good reason for America to bear this regional
security burden alone as Asian societies grow increasingly rich and powerful.

Moving from a U.S.-centered security system toward regional collective security
won't be simple. But it could establish a more reliable basis for future
regional peace.

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Washington at Work;
The Senator Pursues 'Untold' M.I.A. Story

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1656 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


Senator John F. Kerry remembers well the advice he got a year ago when he was
considering whether to lead a new investigation into the fate of prisoners of
war and other Americans who never came home from Vietnam.

"Everybody on my staff, everybody I knew thought I was crazy, and said, 'Don't
do this,' " he recalls. "They said it's a no-win tar baby."

But Senator Kerry, a 48-year-old Massachusetts Democrat, a Vietnam veteran and
former prosecutor, had a hunch that there might be a dispassionate, credible way
to strip this issue of much of its controversy by marshaling two decades of
public and secret documents. He dug deep into his own past and knew he couldn't
walk away.

"This is a fascinating untold story, an incredible story," he said. "This thing
has consumed American politics for 20 years."

Exposed B.C.C.I. Scandal

The junior Senator and former Lieutenant Governor from Massachusetts, who began
his Congressional career in the shadow of the state's more famous son, Edward M.
Kennedy, was sometimes criticized by colleagues for being an opportunist with
little depth in any major national issue. But he has recently acquired a
reputation for taking on cases other legislators shrank from tackling when he
began exposing the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, while government
officials were playing down the importance of the scandal.

Last August, the Senator became chairman of the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, and began a journey through the labyrinth of fact and
fiction on which a powerful grass-roots crusade has been constructed.

He says he does not want to draw any conclusions on any aspect of the issue
while his committee is taking testimony and its final report is still months
away. But in hearings last week on the most contentious aspect of the missing
story -- the unsubstantiated but persistent reports of Americans seen alive in
Indochina since the war -- Mr. Kerry said the public should exercise caution.

"The sheer number of live-sighting reports -- more than 1,500 since the end of
the war -- indicates to some that Americans, perhaps hundreds, must have been
left behind," he said.

Not Drawing Conclusions Yet

"However, our failure over 20 years to locate any of those Americans has caused
others to conclude that the reports must be false," he added, reflecting the
opinion of most officials who have dealt with this issue. "We are not going to
draw conclusions until this process is complete."

A day later, he alluded to the possibility that relatives will never believe
that no Americans are alive in Indochina as long as the Defense Department
officials charged with investigating live-sighting reports cannot go immediately
to the sites. Americans are barred entirely from some areas in Vietnam and Laos
where people have reported seeing Caucasians.

"You guys," he remarked to a panel of high-ranking Defense intelligence agents
who had been testifying for two days, "are caught in the worst Catch-22
craziness in all of history."

Mr. Kerry is nevertheless convinced that a thorough investigation of the issue
is necessary "if we are going to move on beyond Vietnam." Other investigations
never satisfied those charging cover-ups, like the family members who heckled
President Bush at an appearance before their annual convention on July 24.

The Senator's investigation also has its share of critics, some of them on the
committee staff, which has been shaken by squabbles between Mr. Kerry's aides
and those of the committee's deputy chairman, Senator Bob Smith, a New Hampshire
Republican who is also a Vietnam veteran. Several Smith staff members have lost
security clearances and jobs on the committee because of leaked documents.

In public hearings and many hours of closed-door testimony, Mr. Kerry says, he
has "established the reality of what we knew in 1973," adding that the most
difficult part of the job may be over. In that year, American forces were
withdrawn from Vietnam, but not all the prisoners came home as expected, despite
assurances to the contrary from the Nixon Administration.

"All of us expected a full accounting," he said. "All of us expected to get
every one of the prisoners back. None of us ever anticipated that the government
might not follow through on the peace accord."

But the Nixon Administration was caught between an unpopular war and the
mushrooming Watergate crisis, and the public did not want to hear any more about
Vietnam.

Mr. Kerry's committee has now forced the declassifying of more than a million
documents and has elicited admissions from a range of officials who knew that
American prisoners of war were thought to be alive but unaccounted for in
Vietnam in 1973.

Initially, it was believed that 244 prisoners did not come home. But returning
prisoners said 111 of those had died, reducing the list to 133. Because many of
these were aviators, there is no specific information about where they
disappeared or where they may have last been seen alive.

2,266 Unaccounted For

Mr. Kerry says he would also like the Defense Department to take a more
realistic look at the long list of 2,266 names of people still unaccounted for
in Indochina, at least half of whom are thought to have died but whose bodies
could not be found.

"You can't walk around as a Vietnam veteran and have this thing hanging out
there," said the Senator, a lawyer educated at Yale and Boston College Law
School. As a Navy officer he commanded patrol boats in the Mekong Delta in the
1960's, and was awarded the Silver Star, Bronze Star and three Purple Hearts for
his distinguished war service.

A few years after his return to the United States in 1969, he joined the antiwar
movement and became a spokesman of the Vietnam Veterans of America, a group that
was considered radical in its formative years -- so much so, Mr. Kerry says,
that he finally left the organization. The veterans' group has since become more
moderate.

Mr. Kerry says he sees no inconsistency in opposing the war in the 1970's and
pressing now for a fuller accounting of what happened to those who are still
missing. And he says Americans have been mistaken in portraying the missing
issue as a right-wing cause.

"Everybody in America cares about this," he said. "We ought to keep faith with
people who wear the uniform. I think that goes beyond politics."

He said his quarrel with the Vietnam War was not with the original aim of the
United States, which he called "fundamentally noble," but with the strategies of
both war and peace pursued by Washington.

'Bodyguard of Lies'

"A bodyguard of lies surrounded our effort in Vietnam," he said. "We weren't
just helping people to help themselves; we had taken it over."

When the Nixon Administration began making secret overtures for peace in 1968,
he said, he and other skeptics allowed time to pass before joining actively in
the antiwar movement.

"I came back in 1969," he said. "It was not until 1971 that I demonstrated. We
gave the President extraordinary leeway to put this secret plan in place."

It soon frustrated him to know that "friends were being killed because of the
vanity with which the President pursued his peace process."

"Half the names on the Vietnam Wall were put there after 1968," he said.

Mr. Kerry's research has taken him to Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia as well as to
Russia, where the collapse of the Soviet Union suddenly opened new areas of
investigation into what former Soviet officials knew, or how they were involved
in dealing with Americans.

Racing to beat a year-end deadline on its work, the committee has created a
database of all that is known about Vietnam-era servicemen.

"Finally, we're dealing with what is myth and what is reality," Mr. Kerry said.
"I want a process and a record that is not subject to guessing or further
fantasy but rather subject only to analysis of the truth. There may be some
questions that still remain, but they won't be questions about conspiracy, but
rather questions about the weight of evidence. At least the evidence will be
there."

"You can't create a prisoner out of somebody who didn't serve in Vietnam," he
said. "You can't create a prisoner out of somebody who came home. You can't
create a prisoner out of somebody whose name is on the Wall."

The Senator insists that he can keep the discovery process out of partisan
politics in an election year.  The committee hearings draw spectators from all
over the United States, reflecting a solid Middle American constituency that
believes it has never been dealt all the facts. Ross Perot, the former
undeclared Presidential contender, who since the late 1960's has made many trips
to Vietnam in the belief that he could negotiate a deal to free prisoners, is to
testify before the panel on Tuesday.

Social Divide Is Seen

Mr. Kerry said he is aware of a social divide lurking under the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
debate, something he learned when he became active in veterans affairs two
decades ago.

"It was an eye-opener for me, because I came from a privileged background," he
said. "I came into contact with a awful lot of vets from Main Street and
minority vets -- Native Americans, blacks, Hispanics -- who had carried the
brunt of the war. I saw the way they were treated."

"A lot of people see this issue as an extension of their disenfranchisement, of
their separation from mainstream power and its ability to affect their lives,"
he said.

"We can show them that the government can work," he said. "I see this as one of
the things that intrigued me: to get concrete results in a way that reconnects
us to those legitimate concerns of the people."


Because of an editing error, the article also referred incorrectly to the cases
of aviators who disappeared in the Vietnam War. Because they were flyers, there
is indeed often specific information about where they disappeared or where they
may have last been seen alive.

NAME: John F. Kerry

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 11, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A Washington at Work article yesterday about Senator John F. Kerry misidentified
his law school in some editions. As an adjoining biographical chart said, it was
Boston College Law School.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts being greeted by
supporters last month in Washington after he addressed the National Alliance of
Families about the status of missing servicemen. (Vincent Ricardel for The New
York Times)

Chart: "John Forbes Kerry"

Born -- December 11, 1943

Hometown -- Boston

Family -- Divorced with two daughters

Education -- High School: St. Paul's School, Concord, N.H.; B.A., Yale
Univeristy (1966); M.A., J.D., Boston College Law School (1976)

Military -- Navy (1966-1969); awarded the Silver Star, Bronze Star with Combat
"V" and three Purple Hearts

Career Highlights -- Lieutenant Governor of Massachussets (1982-84); U.S. Senate
(1985-present); Vietnam Veterans of America, founding member

Hobbies -- Skiing, flying, playing ice hockey, reading history and other
nonfiction.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BARCELONA;
Dream Team Memories and Forgettables

BYLINE: By HARVEY ARATON

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 3; Sports Desk

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Charles Barkley: In Monte Carlo, a car went through the window of a
crystal shop in the lobby of the team's hotel. No truth to the rumor that
Barkley was at the wheel, but that describes the Dreamers' leading scorer (18.0
on 70 percent shooting). No one would even get in his way. No one could shut him
up or shut him down. M.V.P.
Chart: "Dream Team Memories and Forgettables"

Larry Bird: Played in all eight games, not bad for a guy who announced on the
eve of the Games: "I've been retired for four years, only nobody knows it yet."
Highlight was a 19- point game against Germany. Showed off his fluency in
Spanish when a Mexican reporter asked him what message he had for his fans south
of the U.S. border: "Si," said Bird, after thinking it over.

Clyde Drexler: Fifth in scoring, sixth in rebounding, fourth in steals, fourth
in assists, made 72 percent of his shots, showed up to several women's games,
was receptive to all, and all anyone ever does is compare the guy to Michael
Jordan. No way to win.

Patrick Ewing: No reason for the Knicks to panic, just because Ewing bought
every pump fake the Angolans showed him, fouled out and then repeated that
sickly performance in 14 minutes against Germany's frontline of Hans and Franz.
The least quoted Dreamer, except maybe for Christian Laettner, this close
personal friend of Larry Bird's came up big in the gold medal game. So there.

Magic Johnson: Entered the track and field stadium minutes before the 100
meters, the glamor event of the Games, and 70,000 heads turned to gape. Moved
many to tears with this obvious joy on the gold medal stand. Had six turnovers
in 108 minutes and immediately became this team's unquestioned leader. We all
were reminded of what we missed.

Michael Jordan: What Jordan's teammates came away with was the realization of
how much better he is than everyone else. "Not even close," said Chuck Daly.
"Whenever he wanted to, he could just take over." Did not finish in top 10 in
scoring, for obvious reasons, but led the tournament in steals. Wonder if the
flag he draped over his right shoulder for the medal ceremony bore his favorite
company logo.

Christian Laettner: The word on the Dream Team grapevine is that the pros don't
think anyone will be inviting this guy to Son of Dream Team in 1996. "Can't get
his shot off inside," said one Dreamer. "Not a great player," said another. From
Duke to the Dream Team to the Timberwolves. Now is that fair?

Karl Malone: Tied Ewing as the team's leading rebounder. Third-leading scorer,
even though he always seemed to be blowing a layup or dunk. Like Barkley, just
too physical for the international game to cope with.

Chris Mullin: Someone asked Mullin if the crowds in the street had been
difficult. "It depends who I'm with," he said. Yes, the perfect complementary
Dreamer, always in the right spot to take the pass for the open jumper, which he
seldom missed. Fourth-leading scorer at 14.0, fourth in assists.

Scottie Pippen: No international X Men to keep him out of the paint. Able to
show off his spectacular elasticity in these freewheeling games, making more
funky shots than anyone and averaging a team-leading 6 assists. His obsession
with embarrassing Toni Kukoc was xenophobic idiocy and Kukoc bit back in the
final.

David Robinson: The admirable Adimiral was fun to watch just because he has the
quickest dunk of any big man we can recall. The resident Dream Team
musician/philosopher lost us when he compared sending collegians to play the
Olympics to sending 18-year-olds to Vietnam.

John Stockton: What was wrong with this Dream Team picture? Stockton, that's
what. Terrific point guard. Nice fellow. Butfor the last time: Isiah Thomas
deserved to have been here.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words



International A3-8

ALLIES AGREE ON MILITARY FORCE
Western allies reached agreement on a draft Security Council resolution
authorizing force to get relief into Bosnia and Herzegovina. Approval of the
resolution, which does not specify the nature or source of the military action,
is expected.  A1

SUSTENANCE ON BOSNIA'S TABLES
While diplomats gathered to work out an approach to aid Bosnia, Sarajevans
grappled with a more basic need: flour for bread that helps keep the city's
400,000 people alive.  A1



THE PENTAGON STRATEGY
The Balkan war is not the sort of conflict the Pentagon prefers to get involved
in. The recent strategy has been to avoid the pitfalls of drawn-out internal
struggles and strike only when speed is possible.  A6

WRAPPING UP ISRAEL AID ACCORD
Prime Minister Rabin, visiting President Bush in Maine, is expected to join the
President in announcing an accord on $10 billion in loan guarantees that had
been a sticking point with the Shamir Government.  A1


NO SPECIAL PROSECUTOR ON IRAQ
The Administration refused to seek the appointment of an independent prosecutor
to investigate whether officials violated the law by trying to aid Iraq before
the gulf war.  A1

DOCUMENTS ON M.I.A.'s RELEASED
Laos and members of the Nixon Administration came up in documents released by
the Pentagon on the investigation of Americans missing from the Vietnam War.  A7


BULL'S-EYE FOR MAJOR'S CRITICS
The darts -- political, economic and diplomatic -- are flying at John Major,
Britain's Prime Minister, from all sides, including a few pointed ones aimed by
Margaret Thatcher, who chose him to succeed her.  A3

PARAMILITARY GROUP BANNED
The British Government is outlawing the Ulster Defense Association, making it a
crime to belong to Northern Ireland's largest Protestant paramilitary
organization.  A3

REBELS' SHELLS PELT KABUL
More than 1,000 casualties were reported when the Afghan capital was pounded by
its worst bombardment since the 14-year civil war began. The Government blamed a
Muslim fundamentalist rebel faction.  A5

Kronstadt Journal: From naval maneuvers to commercial ones.  A4

National A12-17

DRUG APPROVAL, FOR A PRICE
The Government and the drug industry neared an agreement that would speed drug
approval by requiring companies to pay the Government fees to be used to hire
600 examiners.  A1

G.O.P. PLATFORM STICKS TO RIGHT
Republicans began writing a party platform that advocates a Constitutional
amendment outlawing abortion and calls for a repeal of the tax increases
President Bush signed two years ago. In other words, the platform would stress
conservative principle over pragmatic drift toward the center.  A1

INSIDE THE CLINTON WAR ROOM
Led by James Carville, the Clinton campaign often seems more military than
political, constantly on both the attack and the defense. The chiefs of staff in
the Clinton War Room are all experienced in the more brutal sort of politics.
A16

PRE-CONVENTION ATTACKS
Governor Clinton asserted that conflict between the President and his fellow
Republicans would bring about increasing Federal budget deficits if Mr. Bush
were re-elected.  A17

Political Week: Bush entered campaign mode, just in time.  A16

UTILITY VOTES TO SHUT A-PLANT
In a sign of the decline of nuclear power, an Oregon utility has voted to shut
down the Trojan nuclear plant in 1996, halfway through its planned lifetime. The
company decided that it was no longer worth the cost to operate the plant.
Around the nation, the operators of about 20 other plants with a similar design
may face the same decision.  A14

ADDING TO WELFARE'S DESPAIR
As a mother on welfare in California, Sonja Blutgarten makes difficult
trade-offs every day, giving up, for example, laundry money to buy birthday cake
for her son. But with the state in deep financial trouble, welfare benefits will
probably be cut significantly.  A12

USE OF COW HORMONE OPPOSED
Congressional investigators urged the Government to delay commercial approval of
a genetically engineered hormone that increases milk production in cows, until
questions are resolved concerning its effects on people's health.  A14

FOLLOWING BARCELONA'S ACT
Atlanta Journal: This city has begun its status as host of the next Olympic
Summer Games, but it has dawned on a lot of Atlantans that it might be difficult
to measure up to Barcelona's rich history, stunning architecture, mountains and
sea.  A12

Four Los Angeles police officers pleaded not guilty, again.  A14

Metro Digest B1

CAPITAL OF CAR THEFT
When some youths in Newark want to steal a car, nothing stops them. Usually
young, black, jobless and poor, they have helped make Newark the nation's top
city for car thefts.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science C1-10

Star-gulpers may power the brightest galaxies.  C1

Very low cholesterol may not be the healthiest amount to have.  C1

A battery of questions may predict divorce.  C1

Clues in bones point to warm-blooded dinosaurs.  C2

Finding a new messenger for the brain's signals.  C3

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Audition tips for opera singers.  C11

A new Roget's International.  C11

Music: Lollapalooza '92.  C11

They Might Be Giants.  C12

Word and Image: "Crossed Over." C15

Fashion B7

Rich choices in swimwear

Sports B8-13

Baseball: Hearts breaking in San
Francisco.  B9 Mets lose marathon to Pirates.  B9

Fielder leads Tigers over Yankees.  B10

Dodgers end Braves' streak. B11

Rhoden on the Olympics.  B9

Winning isn't everything for Giants.  B9

Horse Racing: Breeders' Cup to stay in Florida.  B8

Olympics: Let's do it again, says Samaranch. B9

Obituaries D18-19

Lord Devlin, British judge and legal critic.  D19

Paul Gapp, Pulitzer Prizewinning architecture critic.  D19

Max W. Salvadori, anti-Fascist resistance fighter and professor.  D19

Paul F. Reilly, prosecutor for Dewey and Hogan.  D18

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Margaret Thatcher as Churchill.

Why stop at a flatter tax?

Bright ideas for dull schools.

Topics: The faces of AIDS.

Letters

Russell Baker: Those wonderful folks.

Alexander Karageorgevitch: Punish Serbia's rulers, not its people.

Barbara Roberts: Bush blows it on health care.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Reserves of Flour in Sarajevo Dwindle to a 2-Week Supply

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovi na, Aug. 10


Officials said today that less than two weeks' reserve of flour was left at
Sarajevo's only functioning bakery, posing the threat of hunger just as the
United States and other Western powers debate military options to insure the
delivery of food and medicine to the city.

Adding urgency to the steps contemplated by President Bush and other leaders,
the officials said it would be necessary to augment the 200 tons a day of
supplies that are being flown into Sarajevo airport -- only limited amounts of
it flour -- with overland convoys from points outside Bosnia and Herzegovina,
principally the Adriatic port of Split in Croatia.

The flour shortages were discovered by reporters during a visit to the
Velepekara Bakery in the west of the city and were only reluctantly confirmed by
city officials later, after they said the level of flour reserves was a secret.

'A Guerrilla's Dream'

In another complication to the plans to aid the people of Bosnia, officials said
any mission to deliver relief supplies would have to range far beyond Sarajevo
to areas where few if any outsiders have ventured in months. Maj. Gen. Lewis W.
MacKenzie of Canada, the former United Nations military commander here, has
described the winding mountain roads to those areas as "a guerrilla's dream."

The people of this city say they are aware that President Bush has emphasized
that he wants to limit United States military involvement to avoid being dragged
into a prolonged conflict like Vietnam. But many are hoping that once Western
forces become involved, they will be drawn in deeper.

"It's exactly what we have been thinking: Let Bush come with humanitarian aid,
take control of the roads, get his troops or his helicopters shot at, shoot
back, and pretty soon he'll find he's fighting the same war as us," said a
senior adviser to Bosnia's President.

Bosnian officials, asked to list the places they consider in desperate need of
food and medical supplies, cited Sarajevo, the towns of Zenica, Tuzla, Jajce and
Bihac to the north and northwest of here, and half a dozen towns in eastern
Bosnia where Serbian "ethnic cleansing" attacks have been fiercest. Of these,
the most desperate appears to be Gorazde, 70 miles east of here by mountainous
road, but the officials said many Muslims were going hungry in the mountain
areas to which they have retreated outside Zvornik, Bratunac, Visegrad, Foca and
Rogatica, among other towns.

If the augmented relief effort contemplated by the Western powers were to try to
reach all of those areas, or even some of them, control of several of the most
strategic roads in Bosnia would be needed, roads that the Serbian forces use
frequently for their military convoys and along which they have until now been
reluctant to allow access to any outsiders. Two weeks ago, a relief convoy that
tried to reach Gorazde under guarantees from the Serbian nationalists was forced
to turn back after hitting land mines and coming under small-arms fire.

While criticizing Mr. Bush's initiatives as inadequate, senior officials here
emphasized that the food and medical supplies were valued, and even crucial in
some respects. According to what they and managers of the Velepekara Bakery said
about the dwindling supplies of flour, Sarajevo needs to start rebuilding
reserves that have provided most of the staple food for this city's population
of 400,000 throughout the four-month siege.

The flour has been used to make bread and pasta, but the pasta making was
suspended 10 days ago, the bakery manager said, to conserve flour for baking
bread. Even if the United Nations stepped in and started delivering the 60 tons
a day of flour that will be needed, the manager said, the bakery would still
face increasingly dire problems as a result of shortages of diesel fuel. It is
needed to power the ovens and run the delivery trucks and the water trucks that
have carried 15 tankloads to the bakery each day since Serbian forces cut off
most of the city's running water last month.

The relief demands that could accumulate if the Security Council approves
militarily protected overland convoys are enormous. Sarajevo's winter arrives in
October, and the city is without glass for most of its windows, without coal or
other heating fuels, and without the means to repair shell-blasted central
heating stations that provide most of the high-rise apartment blocks in the city
with hot water for radiators.

Beyond this, the city has virtually no shops left functioning, and thus no
clothing stores where the thousands who have lost their winter clothing in the
Serbian attacks can replace it.

Contemplating the undertaking that the United Nations appears to be on the verge
of assuming, an official it would be easier for Mr. Bush to approve the bombing
of the Serbian gun positions around the city and the lifting of the United
Nations arms embargo.

"If he continues to insist that his only responsibility is to feed us, what he
will be doing is prolonging our agony," said Mustafa Pamuk, the chief official
of the Sarajevo city government. "In effect, he'll be extending the safari on
which the Serbian forces have engaged, a hunt whose purpose is to track us down,
one by one, and kill us."

On the streets of Sarajevo, and in the offices of officials of the Bosnian
Government, the pronouncements made by President Bush in recent days have been
widely criticized as inadequate. Above all, this has been because of Mr. Bush's
insistence on limiting new United States involvement to the provision of
augmented relief supplies.

Because Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the Democratic Presidential nominee, has
said that he would favor bombing and lifting the arms embargo on the Bosnian
Government, he is enjoying a sudden popularity here.

"Clinton yes! Bush no!" a 12-year-old boy named Nihad said to a reporter who
halted his car to buy a newspaper along Marshal Tito Street in the heart of the
city. The boy bounded away up an alley before his views could be explored
further. But they stood essentially for what the great majority of Sarajevans
appeared to be thinking as they absorbed the latest development in the world's
reaction to their plight.

                             --------------------


Threat of Guerrilla War

TIRANA, Albania, Aug. 10 (AP) -- Yugoslavia's Prime Minister warned today that
Western military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina could lead to a
disastrous guerrilla war.

The Prime Minister, Milan Panic, said Yugoslavia would not send in troops if the
West intervened in Bosnia, but would defend itself if attacked.

"We don't need more fighting," he said aboard his Boeing 727 during a one-day
tour of Greece and Albania. "We need peace. Western intervention could lead to
disaster. It could trigger a full-scale guerrilla war in Bosnia and a second
Vietnam in the Balkans."

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
U.S. AND 2 ALLIES BACK A U.N. THREAT ON AID FOR BOSNIA

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 10


Overcoming earlier differences, the United States, Britain and France agreed
today to press for a Security Council resolution threatening the use of force to
insure the supply of food and medicine to beleaguered parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina but not specifying what military steps would be taken.

The proposed resolution, which United Nations diplomats said would probably win
approval later this week, left unclear which countries would participate in any
military action. It also confined the use of force to the delivery of relief
supplies, ruling out force to stop the fighting in the area or rescue people
from detention camps in the former Yugoslav republic.

While such questions seem to leave little prospect of immediate, specific
military action, diplomats here say their hope is that adoption of the
resolution will intimidate Serbian and Bosnian Muslim forces into greater
cooperation with the United Nations relief efforts.

The resolution, which employs language similar to that used when the Security
Council authorized the Persian Gulf war, received a positive response from
Russia, the fourth of the Council's five permanent members with a veto on
decisions, because it strictly limits the use of force to relief objectives.
[Text of draft resolution, page A6.]

China Expected to Abstain

Western diplomats expect China, the Council's fifth permanent member, to abstain
along with Zimbabwe when the resolution is put to a vote later this week because
of its traditional opposition to military action. But with other members likely
to vote in favor, the resolution appears assured of a substantial majority of
the 15-member Council.

The three Western permanent members also agreed on a second resolution today,
again invoking Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which permits the
Council to enforce its orders. The second resolution warns all parties to the
conflict that they will be held responsible for war crimes, tells those with
evidence of such crimes to present it to the Council and demands immediate Red
Cross access to prison camps and detention centers.

The new resolution on force seeks to bridge earlier divisions between the
European and American viewpoints by saying that any armed intervention must be
"in coordination" with the United Nations.

This phrase is intended to insure that the existing United Nations peacekeeping
force and relief agencies remain in place and continue their present operations,
even though they may face outright attack by Serbian forces after the new
resolution is adopted, probably on Wednesday.

The central passage in the resolution "calls upon all states to take nationally
or through regional agencies or arrangements all measures necessary to
facilitate in coordination with the United Nations, the delivery by relevant
United Nations humanitarian organizations and others of humanitarian assistance
to Sarajevo and wherever needed to other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina."

It also demands "unimpeded and continuous access" to all camps and detention
centers for relief organizations and says inmates must receive "humane
treatment, including adequate food, shelter and medical care."

The resolution does not address such fundamental questions as which countries
would provide armed ground forces or air power to insure the convoys get through
if the warring factions continue to obstruct them.

The United States and its European allies have made clear in recent days that
they are deeply reluctant to expose their forces to the risk of becoming bogged
down in what President Bush has termed a "quagmire."

Hope for More Supplies

Diplomats here say their hope is that authorizing the use of force will
encourage the combatants in Bosnia to allow a substantial increase in the
present slow trickle of supplies getting through to needy people.

They hope that the London peace conference, opening Aug. 27 under the joint
chairmanship of the European Community and the United Nations, will also serve
to nudge the parties toward closer cooperation with the international aid
agencies and increase their respect for human rights.

In the short run, this meeting may not be much more successful than previous
peace initiatives in promoting a lasting cease-fire between these factions,
diplomats here say. But they say it should at least provide an even- handed
forum for peacemaking, equally acceptable to Serbs, Croats and Muslims, when
they decide they are tired of fighting.

"The most important thing is to keep people living, to make sure that there is a
generation coming, that babies can be fed," the American chief delegate at the
United Nations, Edward J. Perkins, said after the three presented their draft to
other Council members this afternoon. "And that's what this is all about. It's
not about creating a Vietnam. It's not about fighting a war."

But if any of the warring factions decide the resolution is really a bluff that
it should call, then diplomats here argue that the Western powers will be
compelled to overcome their hesitations and devise a viable military plan of
action if they want the Security Council to retain any shred of credibility.

Initial reactions from the various parties involved in the war was not
encouraging.

Bosnia's United Nations representative, Muhamid Sacirbey, said the text did not
present the Serbs with a convincing deterrent to continuing their policy of
"ethnic cleansing." The Council should have lifted its arms embargo against
Bosnia so the Muslims could arm themselves and resist Serbian aggression, he
said.

'Not the Proper Emphasis'

Radmila Milentijvic, a minister in the Serbian Government in Belgrade, said "the
emphasis on military force is not the proper emphasis." The emphasis should be
on peace, he said, and aimed at forcing Serbs, Muslims and Croats to the
negotiating table.

As with the Council resolution authorizing the gulf war, the new draft text
leaves it up to interested countries to decide how any military intervention
will be organized.

And the language has been crafted to allow either the formation of a coalition
of like-minded countries or the formal involvement of regional military
organizations, such as NATO and Western European Union.

Originally the United States had suggested a resolution authorizing the use of
all necessary measures to bring in relief supplies by governments cooperating
with Bosnia, a formula very similar to that used to authorize the war against
Iraq.

Britain and France balked, however, saying this would look too much like a
declaration of war against the Serbs, which might provoke an attack on the
existing lightly armed United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia that is
trying to escort relief convoys through the war zone.

The Europeans feared that the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, who has accused the Council of preoccupation with the Balkans to
the detriment of third world trouble spots like Somalia, would then try to
withdraw the Bosnian peacekeepers for their own safety, forcing relief agencies
to pull out, too.

The 60 United Nations military officers deployed in the hills around Sarajevo
monitoring heavy weapons are felt to be particularly at risk of being taken
hostage or killed, as are the Ukrainian peacekeepers serving in the area.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Muhamed Sacirbey, the Bosnian delegate to the United Nations,
said the text of the proposed resolution did not present the Serbs with a
convincing deterrent to continuing their policy of "ethnic cleansing."; "The
emphasis on military force is not the proper emphasis," said Radmila
Miletijevic, a minister in the Serbian government in Belgrade, of the proposed
resolution. "The emphasis should be on peace." (Photographs by Don Hogan
Charles/The New York Times) (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 79 words


A Washington at Work article yesterday about Senator John F. Kerry misidentified
his law school in some editions. As an adjoining biographical chart said, it was
Boston College Law School.

Because of an editing error, the article also referred incorrectly to the cases
of aviators who disappeared in the Vietnam War. Because they were flyers, there
is indeed often specific information about where they disappeared or where they
may have last been seen alive.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Limits of U.S. Role
White House Is Seeking to Minimize Any Use of Military in Balkan Conflict

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


As the Bush Administration considers possible military intervention in the
Balkan war, it seems determined to minimize the American role, convinced that
the conflict represents neither the time nor the place to use military power in
a world no longer dominated by the cold war.

By defining American and Western aims as guaranteeing the delivery of relief
aid, the Administration appears to be ruling out the use of American force to
quell the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and force the warring parties to
negotiate a cease-fire. Officials have remained largely silent on whether
outside forces should be used to insure access to Serbian detention camps in
Bosnia, taking a cautious stance that is generally echoed by Washington's
European allies.

What the Western powers appear prepared to do is use force to insure that food
and medicine are delivered to the Bosnians, though it is still not clear exactly
how this would be done.

Supplies could be delivered overland using armed convoys, a strategy that could
minimize the presence of foreign troops, who have sometimes been a magnet for
attacks. Some military specialists at NATO headquarters, however, say the better
military course would be use several divisions to secure the winding,
mountainous land corridor from the Adriatic to Sarajevo and prevent ambushes.

From a military standpoint, as former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of
Britain, Gov. Bill Clinton and others have suggested, there may be options the
West could exercise that would help dampen the conflict, or at least help the
Bosnians defend themselves if the fighting continues, while avoiding the kind of
long-term involvement that is feared by the Administration and the Pentagon in
particular.

These options include punitive air strikes, raids to seize the detention camps
and the lifting of the arms embargo so that the poorly equipped Bosnians could
better acquit themselves against the well-armed Serbs. Virtually nobody is
talking about injecting a huge ground force to pacify the region.

From the Pentagon's vantage point, the Balkan war is not an inviting conflict.
In Panama and again in the Persian Gulf, the Pentagon demonstrated that its
vision of warfare is a short violent conflict in which the United States brings
overwhelming force to bear and then quickly withdraws, leaving the local
inhabitants to sort things out for themselves. Anything short of that tends to
be seen as a quagmire in which each small step deepens the military's
involvement and raises the prospects of defeat.

Whose Troops?

It is a dichotomy born out of the military's bitter experience in Vietnam and
Lebanon. And over the last weeks Pentagon officials have made clear that they
see Balkan conflict as a potential Lebanon, where American 241 servicemen where
killed in the truck bombing at the Marine headquarters in 1983. The plans that
Western powers are developing for possible military intervention are shaped more
by the desire to avoid becoming entangled in the region's blood feuds than to
put an end to the fighting.

Moreover, it is not clear which countries would contribute such forces, and it
is doubtful whether any of the Western powers are willing to contribute large
number of ground troops. An American Army division can comprise 10,000 to 20,000
troops.

At the same time, Western military action against the Serbs could broaden the
conflict without producing a decisive result, top Administration officials say.
Air strikes against Serbian artillery might produce some temporary relief to the
Bosnians but would be unlikely to end the fighting.

Some critics complain that the Administration and its Western allies have
allowed themselves to become paralyzed by the all-or-nothing school of military
thinking and the possibility that limited measures may not succeed. Limited
military objectives, they say, can be precisely defined. And while such steps
might not bring about a quick end to the fighting, they say, it would be better
than inaction.

Western powers, for example, could insist that the warring parties turn their
heavy weapons over to United Nations monitors and give Western observers access
to their detention camps. If the demands are not heeded, demonstration punitive
air strikes could be conducted.

Serbian Air Threat

Beyond that, air strikes could be used to blunt the artillery and mortar attacks
on Sarajevo and other Muslim strongholds. The Air Force and the Navy might not
eliminate all of the artillery, but they would get some, helping to equalize the
military balance, now skewed heavily in favor of the Serbs.

Some possible actions are well within the capacities of Western air forces.
According to classified intelligence reports, for example, Serbian aircraft
based in Banja Luka, a Serbian-controlled airfield in Bosnia, used cluster bombs
against the Bosnians last week. Western air forces, which quickly dispatched the
Iraqi Air Force, could easily neutralize the Serbian air threat, military
experts say.

Critics also say that if the Administration is determined not to intervene in
the fighting, it should at least rethink its commitment to an arms embargo so
that the Bosnians could better defend themselves. Last week, the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee called for reconsidering the arms embargo.

In its first detailed planning for the post-cold-war era, the Pentagon
envisioned seven potential military conflicts, ranging from a coup in the
Philippines to a war with North Korea. None of them included the use of military
force in a situation like the Balkans, where the breakup of Yugoslavia has
unleashed ethnic warfare.

With end of the cold war, the glue that has held the Soviet Union and Eastern
European nations together has given way, ethnic groups are reasserting
themselves and nations have begun to atomize.

The question is whether the fragmentation can be carried out without violence,
and whether there is a role for using Western military force to keep the peace
if fighting erupts. In that sense, the Balkan conflict may be a truer test of
whether military force can be used to preserve a "new world order" than the
Persian Gulf war.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Laos at Center of Search for Vietnam P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 10


Documents being released by the Pentagon show that Laos has been a persistent
focus of attention and frustration through nearly two decades of investigation
of Americans still missing from the Vietnam War.

The documents also disclose that a lengthening list of officials in Richard M.
Nixon's Administration believed that as many as several hundred people were
missing when the war-time prisoner exchange ended in 1973.

On Tuesday, Ross Perot, who is among those who have asserted that Laos is
withholding information, will testify before the committee.

Mr. Perot, a Texas businessman who has pursued a Presidential nomination, made
several trips to Southeast Asia to look for prisoners, the first in 1969 and the
last in 1987, after which he wrote to President Ronald Reagan, "The evidence
that men were held in Laos is substantial."

Some such evidence is summarized in a bleak memorandum written in March 1973 by
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, then Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense, to Defense
Secretary Elliot L. Richardson. The memo was released by the Pentagon in July.

Mr. Eagleburger, writing that the Defense Intelligence Agency had listed 350
Americans, civilian and military, as missing in Laos, reported that the
Ambassador in Laos, McMurtrie Godley, had been instructed to press the Soviet
Ambassador to win cooperation from the Lao Patriotic Front, the governing
coalition. Mr. Godley is also to testify Tuesday.

The Lao Patriotic Front was later forced to cede all power to its Communist
contingent, the Pathet Lao, which had both Soviet and North Vietnamese support.
Hanoi controlled significant areas of Laos during and after the war.

"After the recovery of the last prisoners from NVN," Mr. Eagleburger wrote in
March 1973, referring to North Vietnam, "Hanoi should be advised unequivocally
that we still hold them responsible for the return of all P.O.W.'s being held in
Indochina."

Mr. Eagleburger suggested steps that could be taken to intimidate the Laotians
and Vietnamese into cooperating, culminating in air strikes "as a last resort."

The gist of that memo was passed on by Mr. Richardson to Henry A. Kissinger,
President Nixon's national security adviser, later the same month.

By the end of 1973, however, Congress had cut off all money for operations in
Indochina and Hanoi had begun its two-year assault on the South in defiance of
the Paris peace accord, ending with the fall of Saigon.

Because the United States did not send ground troops into Laos, which was
technically neutral, nearly all the Americans lost there were crewmen on bombing
or reconnaissance flights. In a significant number of cases, American officials
knew exactly where a plane had been shot down or crashed, and that one or more
crewman may have survived. When these aviators were not returned, questions were
raised that have not been answered.

Similar questions surround at least 133 servicemen who Washington was certain
were prisoners of war in Vietnam but who were not freed by Hanoi.

There have been recurrent allegations that Hanoi was holding Americans as ransom
against war reparations of $3 billion to $4 billion that the North Vietnamese
say they were promised by President Nixon.

Two newspapers, The Washington Times and The San Diego Union Tribune, have
published articles based on Senate committee documents that purport to show that
as recently as 1981, the Reagan Administration received an offer of the release
of prisoners by Hanoi in return for $4 billion. The reports drew on closed-door
testimony given in July by Richard V. Allen, Mr. Reagan's national security
adviser.

In an interview today, Mr. Allen said that he had only a "distant recollection"
of a discussion on a Hanoi deal for prisoners, but that in retrospect he thinks
that the conversation was not in 1981, as his deposition said, but in 1986,
after he had left Government.

He said he generally approved of trying to make a deal with Hanoi if the offer
were real, not with Government officials but with members of the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
lobby.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

After Crashes, Helping Rescuers Walk Away

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: VERNON, N.J., Aug. 6


The only heavy trucks and buses that have hurtled down Route 515 recently into
this small mountain community were in the nightmares of local emergency workers.

Police patrols have kept vehicles weighing more than four tons off Route 515
since a gasoline tanker truck and a chartered bus, in separate accidents
occurring within 10 days in July, went out of control on the steep mountain road
and crashed with awful results on the outskirts of Vernon, near the New York
State border.

But it is difficult to erase the terrible memories of mangled men, women and
children from the minds of the volunteer rescue workers who rushed to help them,
though psychologists are trying to do just that.

Scenes of Horror

The psychologists came to Vernon to help more than 100 firefighters, emergency
medical workers and police officers in the township cope with scenes of horror
and feelings of powerlessness that many of them felt after the two accidents
were cleared and everyone went home.

Popular "reality-based" television shows about emergency workers do not have
unhappy endings; the victims are rescued and the rescuers never cry.

But in Vernon last month, the reality was that a lot of people were hurt, some
died and rescuers were left both proud and heartbroken.

New Jersey is one of 28 states that in recent years has created
critical-incidence stress debriefing teams that can move quickly to assist
emergency workers traumatized by disasters and other troubling events. Parts of
16 other states have similar teams.

Talking Out Feelings

The idea behind the teams, composed mostly of volunteers with backgrounds in
psychology, therapy and emergency work, is that people exposed to extreme stress
can escape serious emotional disorders if they are assisted in talking out their
feelings in the days after the trauma. Otherwise, such normal reactions as
interrupted sleep, substance abuse, indecisiveness and flashbacks can lead to
persistent personal turmoil. These lessons were learned, in large part, by the
military after Vietnam and more recently by professional police and fire
departments that have organizational support systems to combat job stress.

Members of volunteer departments tend to go their separate ways until their
lives are interrupted by emergencies, and few volunteer fire departments and
rescue squads ever confront the degree of stress those in the Vernon area had to
handle twice in 10 days.

"None of us ever saw anything like the magnitude of the bus crash as we drove up
and people were crawling on the road toward us with missing arms and horrible
wounds and burns," said Paul Mele of the Vernon Ambulance Service. Six
passengers died and 48 others aboard the bus, including children and young
adults, were injured in the July 29 accident. Investigators said bad brakes were
a factor in the accident.

In some ways, the July 16 crash of the gasoline truck, whose cause has yet to be
determined, was a more difficult emotional experience for some of the
firefighters and rescue squad members who worked at both crashes. In that
accident, with 9,000 gallons of volatile gasoline puddling on the ground and
streaming into a nearby brook, rescuers were prevented from cutting open the
truck's crushed cab to remove the injured driver because the slightest spark
could have meant a conflagration. By the time the area was made safe hours
later, the driver, Michael Scotto, 25, of Brooklyn, was dead.

'Would've Given Anything'

"Personally, I would've given anything to save that guy," said Cal Farber, the
owner of a local welding business and head of the Vernon Fire Department's
hazardous material unit. Veron is better prepared than most volunteer
departments. The company owns $250,000 of special equipment to combat dangerous
spills and has a contract with the nearby railroad line to handle accidents in
which volatile chemicals and gasses are present.

"It was a really tough call," said Mr. Farber, "to pull everyone back to clean
up the area first before we dared use power tools or anything that would have
caused a spark."

Dr. Jeffrey T. Mitchell, clinical associate professor of emergency health
services at the University of Maryland who helped establish critical-incidence
debriefing teams in the East, said that standing by unable to help a slowly
dying victim might be one of the most stressful events in a rescue worker's
life.

"We usually see higher numbers of emergency workers with this type of experience
develop full-blown post-traumatic stress disorders than even those exposed to
more horrific accidents," Dr. Mitchell said.

The experience was compounded for the Vernon squads by criticism that they had
not tried hard enough to save the dying truck driver. In fact, several area
truck drivers were holding a small demonstration on Route 515 several hundred
feet away when the bus crashed on July 29.

The crash site is about six miles north of Route 23, and the last three miles of
Route 515 is a steep, twisting two-lane road that drops from a tree-covered
ridge line into this crossroads community. The gasoline tanker and the bus
crashed within 50 feet of one another at the intersection with Breakneck Road,
which angles off to Hidden Valley ski resort.

Burst Into Flames

The tour bus, carrying families from Brooklyn to Action Park, a nearby amusement
park, hit a car, rolled over several times and slammed into another car before
stopping upright on the roadway. Passengers thrown from the bus lay dazed on the
pavement as others struggled to get out of it and the smoking engine burst into
flames.

Ten days earlier, the gasoline truck driven by Mr. Scotto smashed a car trying
to enter Route 515 from Breakneck Road and then plunged down a wooded ravine.

"One spark and the whole mountain would've gone up. Boom!" said Mr. Mele, 26,
one of the first rescuers to reach the scene.

"We could hear him but couldn't find him," said Mr. Mele, who with a firefighter
descended into the ravine to determine the driver's condition. "The cab was
plowed under the chassis and the truck tank. It like was getting a ball of metal
foil and rolling it up with him inside it.

"I talked with him. His main concern was getting out. I asked him what hurt. He
was very vague. He was obviously in shock."

Fire officials, knowing that one cup of gasoline and its fumes can pack the
punch of dynamite, feared that a spark could kill everyone in the vicinity. Mr.
Farber, the hazardous materials unit leader, had to make the call to move
everyone back until the gasoline threat was neutralized.

That did not occur until nearly dawn, too late to save Mr. Scotto, who died,
apparently well before midnight.

Both Mr. Farber and Mr. Mele still looked drawn and tired this week.

"You wonder," said Mr. Farber, a barrel-chested man in faded blue jeans and
cowboy boots, "if it was possible that some other decision was possible."

Mr. Mele joined other volunteers in a counseling session, Mr. Farber did not.
Mr. Farber knows from his training he was right, but the wondering goes on.
Nearly a month after the truck accident he is still uncertain if he should see
the team of psychologists about the turmoil that persists in his mind.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Pet Cemetery Proposal To Honor the Dogs of War

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: HARTSDALE, N.Y.


If ever therewas a year for man's best friend to find new friends in Congress,
this is it: the 50th anniversary of America's dogs of war, the K-9 Corps.

Although they have served honorably in four wars (and unofficially in World War
I), rescuing the wounded and warning of explosives and the enemy, there is no
nationally recognized memorial to the 30,000 dogs that have served the United
States military.

"We're too busy training the dogs we have," said Hildegarde Brown, a spokeswoman
for the Military Working Dog Agency of the Defense Department. There are
currently 3,000 dogs in the K-9 Corps, trained and supervised by the agency at
Lackland Air Force Base, Tex.

Now there is an effort to create a national war dog memorial, focusing on two
locations: here and Washington. "It's a grand idea," Ms. Brown said, "but you
have to have lots of money."

No problem, say the owners of the Hartsdale Canine Cemetery, believed to be the
nation's oldest pet cemetery, where 65,000 dogs, cats and guinea pigs, several
horses and one lion cub are buried amid stone markers reading "Smokey, You Will
Always Be Loved," and "Faithful Barty."

Financed by Schoolchildren

A War Dog Memorial already exists at the Westchester County site, a 10-ton slab
of granite topped by a bronze statue of a German shepherd wearing a Red Cross
blanket. The monument was built with contributions from thousands of
schoolchildren after World War I.

Supported by sympathetic town officials, the cemetery owners have asked Congress
to simply make the Hartsdale monument the national monument and to please do so
in time for the 100th anniversary of the pet cemetery in 1996.

Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, who represents Hartsdale residents in the 22d
Congressional District, has gone one better. Last week, he asked the National
Park Service to place the cemetery and its monument on the National Register of
Historic Places.

But there's a competing proposal in the works, courtesy of Joseph J. White, a
Vietnam veteran and former military dog handler who is president of the National
War Dogs Memorial Project in Jacksonville, Fla. The nonprofit group is dedicated
to building a national K-9 Corps memorial in Washington, in front of the Vietnam
War Memorial.

"Had we used more dogs in Vietnam," Mr. White said, "there would be fewer names
on the wall."

He is outraged about the activities of the Hartsdale group. "They are trying to
steal our thunder," Mr. White said. "That's a business there, not a national
cemetery. They're in this for profits. That's what's wrong with it."

'Why Reinvent the Wheel?'

Edward C. Martin Jr., who has been president of the Hartsdale Canine Cemetery
for 17 years, said the problem was communication. "We thought we were doing a
good thing," he said, "something that would save people a lot of money and
contributions."

Admitting that he was inspired to petition Congress after he saw Mr. White's
literature, Mr. Martin said: "We just thought, there already is a war dog
memorial. Why not use what is already there? Why reinvent the wheel?"

Last week, Mr. Martin wrote to his Florida counterpart, hailing the efforts of
the National War Dogs Memorial Project and saying, "We feel that there could
never be too many such monuments to pay tribute to these gallant animals."

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edward C. Martin Jr., president of the Hartsdale Canine Cemetery
in Hartsdale, N.Y., at the War Dog Memorial built from the contributions of
schoolchildren after World War I. The Hartsdale memorial is vying with
Washington to be the site of a national war dog memorial. (Suzanne DeChillo/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Why Did She Kill? It Just Sort of Happened

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 986 words



Crossed Over
A Murder, a Memoir
By Beverly Lowry
245 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.

On June 13, 1983, two grisly murders were committed in northwest Houston. In the
early hours of that morning, 23-year-old Karla Faye Tucker and her boyfriend,
37-year-old Daniel Ryan Garrett, drove over to the apartment of an acquaintance
named Jerry Lynn Dean. Several hours later, the couple loaded up Dean's El
Camino truck with some motorcycle parts and drove away, leaving behind a scene
of horror. Dean had been bludgeoned to death: his head had been unhinged from
his neck; his chest and back, punctured repeatedly by blows from a pickax. His
companion, a woman named Deborah Ruth Thornton, whom he'd met the previous
evening, was dead, too; the pickax had been left embedded in her chest.

Five weeks later, Mr. Garrett's brother, Douglas, and Ms. Tucker's sister Kari
turned them in to the police. Both were sentenced to death. During their trials,
Ms. Tucker freely confessed to the crimes. "I wanted to tell the truth," she
said. "I wanted the real story to be told. I had to do something about how
sick-minded we must have been to think about something like this." It is her
story that the novelist Beverly Lowry tells in this quick, chilling book.

Ms. Lowry, the author of five novels, writes that she had become obsessed with
Ms. Tucker after reading a newspaper account of her trial. Her teen-age son,
Peter, had recently been killed in a hit-and-run accident, and for some reason,
Ms. Tucker's story struck an emotional chord. It wasn't just that she reminded
Ms. Lowry of Peter: both were troubled youngsters, rebellious, angry and out of
control. It was also that she afforded Ms. Lowry an opportunity to try to come
to terms with the unthinkable, with the awful, brutal surprises sometimes tossed
up by life. If she could understand, even forgive Karla Faye Tucker, she writes,
maybe she could accept what happened to her son, and find a kind of redemption
for herself and Ms. Tucker.

There are many explanations given for the murders committed by Ms. Tucker and
Mr. Garrett. They were both high on speed and pills and lack of sleep. Mr. Dean
had supposedly beaten up Ms. Tucker's best friend, Shawn. And Mr. Dean had
supposedly put out a contract on Ms. Tucker herself, not to kill her, but to
burn her face with a flare gun and scar her for life.

Yet "to look for a particular cause" for the murders, writes Ms. Lowry, "is
about like searching for one particular glob of tar in the whole Gulf of
Mexico." "Reasons?" she asks, "It happened. Reasons piled up."

In the course of "Crossed Over," Ms. Lowry methodically lays out the story of
Ms. Tucker's life, the events that would eventually take her to Death Row. Some
details of her life are supremely ordinary, the sort that make her seem like
just another American girl. There are photos of her parents, as newlyweds,
snuggling on a rust-colored couch in front of pinch-pleat draperies; photos of
Karla and her sister Kari posing in a photographer's studio, in front of a
painted blue backdrop with clouds. Ms. Lowry recounts how Karla learned to
water-ski and drive a boat, how she loved to play touch football with her
father.

The rest of her life, however, boggles the mind. She was smoking marijuana at
the age of 8 or 9, shooting heroin at 10 and having sex at 11 or 12. She was
constantly getting into fistfights and being thrown out of school. Meanwhile,
her parents were divorced, and Ms. Tucker came under the influence of her
rebellious, impossible mother. Her mother taught her how to roll a joint
properly, and how to earn money as a call girl.

As a teen-ager, Ms. Lowry reports, Karla Faye Tucker developed a persona: "Miss
Tough Guy." She was "a fighter, muscular, athletic; a wild girl." She became
part of "the Harley-Davidson subculture," and hung out with tough, street-smart
men, "men," writes Ms. Lowry, "who knew how to wear skintight T-shirts, blue
jeans and motorcycle boots, who could hold their drink and drugs, men who would
watch violent movies and take her to a gun show and buy her a camouflage T-shirt
saying 'Kill Them All. Let God Sort Them Out.' " To impress her, her boyfriend
Danny Garrett began assuming a more and more macho stance; he boasted of his
exploits in Vietnam and said he would train Karla to be the first hit woman in
the Mafia.

Ms. Lowry weaves these events in Ms. Tucker's life into an elliptical, looping
narrative that moves back and forth in time, returning again and again to the
events of June 13, 1983. The reader can see the friendship developing between
Ms. Lowry and Ms. Tucker, and Ms. Lowry's continuing efforts to reconcile the
friendly, open-faced woman she meets once a month in prison with the monster who
viciously murdered two people. She describes the life Ms. Tucker has made for
herself in jail -- making birthday presents for the other inmates, studying the
Bible -- and throws it into contrast with her previous life of sex and drugs and
rock-and-roll.

Interwoven with Ms. Tucker's life is the story of Ms. Lowry's son Peter. Ms.
Lowry tells us about his run-ins with the police, his inexplicable fall from a
happy childhood into a troubled adolescence. She tells us about the night he
went out for a drive, and how his disabled car and his body were found by the
road, an eighth of a mile from home.

"How would you feel," Ms. Tucker asks Ms. Lowry, "if they found the driver of
the truck that killed Peter and there was a trial and they brought the driver up
and said: 'Oh, but he's changed, he's a new person now. See how good he is?' How
would you feel?"

In recounting her own story and the story of Karla Faye Tucker, Ms. Lowry
displays both the sharp, observant eye of a reporter and the emotional empathy
of a novelist. She has produced a book that possesses all the intimacy of a
family memoir, all the gripping drama of an "In Cold Blood."

NAME: Karla Faye Tucker

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Beverly Lowry (Marion Ettlinger/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

PEROT CRITICIZES U.S. HANOI POLICY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


Ross Perot, who helped to foster the belief that American prisoners remained
captive in Indochina after the Vietnam War, told a Senate committee today that a
policy of isolating and "humiliating" Hanoi had been misguided and
counterproductive.

He was also sharply critical of a long American covert war in Laos run by the
Central Intelligence Agency, which he said contributed to the problems the
United States had subsequently faced in Indochina.

The revelations that emerged from the first of two days of hearings this week
came from newly declassified documents from the Pentagon and the White House and
made public by the committee. Among them was a Pentagon memorandum containing
evidence that the Nixon Administration knew, contrary to its public statements,
that Americans were still believed to be held captive in Laos after all
prisoners had been reported returned.

Senior White House officials from the Reagan Administration are to testify on
Wednesday. Nixon Administration officials are expected to appear before the
committee in Spetember.

Perot Fans Turn Out

Mr. Perot, who has withdrawn as a potential Presidential candidate, nevertheless
drew a loyal crowd, including a few autograph-seekers, to the Senate's largest
hearing room, where doors were barred by policemen as testimony began. His
characteristically acerbic quips about Washington -- "a town that lives on how
it looks, not how it is" -- drew laughter and applause from an audience in which
the families of the missing were well represented.

Earlier this year, Mr. Perot, who made three private trips to Southeast Asia on
behalf of missing Americans, had pledged to tell the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs all he knew about servicemen who may have remained in
captivity in Indochina after the Vietnam war ended. He had declined to testify
while contemplating an independent Presidential candidacy, then rescheduled his
appearance after dropping out of the race.

But in nearly a day of long-awaited testimony, Mr. Perot offered little new in
the way of evidence for his belief that Americans not only were left behind but
also are still alive, particularly in Laos.

Mr. Perot devoted much of his testimony today to charges that Government
officials had "covered up, dissembled and finessed this issue for 20-some-odd
years" while pursuing a wrong-headed and unproductive policy toward Vietnam.

Criticizes Administration

"What we have done for 20 years is treat them rudely and punch them around," he
said. A better approach would have been to build trust with Vietnam, which he
called "a poor third-world country." He suggested the appointment of a resident
negotiator-plenipoteniary who would be able to make deals with Hanoi, which with
the Government of Laos is still seeking $3.2 billion in "reparations."

"We ransomed our prisoners out of Hanoi," he said of a 1973 promise of
reconstruction aid from the Nixon Administration. "But we never wrote the check.
And that's what caused the people to be left in Laos."

Mr. Perot accused the Government of having allowed the Central Intelligence
Agency to run its own war in Laos for years, in secrecy and in contravention of
Laotian neutrality. Mr. Perot said that all his efforts to learn more about Laos
were "stonewalled" by successive Administrations.

One of the declassified documents circulated by the committee today appears to
support the committee's finding that Pentagon officials working most closely
with the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue in early 1973 knew that Nixon Administration
declarations that all Americans were accounted for was contrary to the Defense
Department's own information.

Pentagon Memo Released

In a memorandum of May 24, 1973, Roger E. Shields, the Pentagon official in
charge of accounting for missing Americans, asked the Defense Department to
modify a statement made on April 12 saying that there were no more Americans
servicemen alive and in captivity in Indochina.

Mr. Shields, who had made the April 12 statement at a news conference, included
in the memo new information on specific cases of Americans who may have been
taken into captivity after the withdrawal of United States forces. One case
involved a C.I.A. Air America aircraft and another an EC-47 surveillance plane
with eight American crew members.

The White House documents refer to Mr. Perot's last trip to Vietnam, in 1987,
during which he said he was led to believe that the Vietnamese could be drawn
into a deal for the release of prisoners in return for substantial assistance.
But Mr. Perot and his aides said that when Hanoi tried to turn the talks into a
private business arrangement with the Texas billionaire, he dropped his
discussions with the Vietnamese.

The White House documents illustrate the high level at which Mr. Perot was dealt
with by Administration officials, including then Vice President George Bush and
Gen. Colin L. Powell, a member of the National Security Council at the time.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot testifying yesterday before the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cutback in Military Spending: No Help for Ailing Economy

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1884 words


Not since the 1950's has the United States recovered from recession while
military spending was falling sharply. But now that the cold war is over,
America is struggling to do just that, and finding it difficult.

The precipitous drop in military spending in the last 18 months has eroded an
important pillar of the economy, and many economists say that is a big reason
that the United States is now having such trouble pulling out of recession.

While critics of military spending have long argued that the money and manpower
could be better employed in the civilian sector, virtually no one questions that
military spending has served as a powerful source of economic demand.

"There has not been a time when a rise in defense spending would mean more for
the economy than now," said Alicia Munnell, a senior economist at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston. "We are growing so slowly that defense spending can make
the difference between a rising unemployment rate and a falling one."

The military budget authorization -- $286.7 billion in the current fiscal year,
adjusted for inflation -- has been falling at more than 5 percent a year since
1990, notwithstanding the fighting in Kuwait. That is twice as steep as the rate
of decline in the late 1980's.

But among all categories of military spending, the greatest damage to the
economy has come from the cutback in procurement spending: orders placed with
factories. It has been falling by more than 12 percent a year since 1990. And
under President Bush's budget proposal now before Congress, the sum will drop
another 13 percent in fiscal 1993. Procurement has a multiplier effect, creating
jobs not only at military contractors but also at the companies that make the
consumer goods the well-paid military workers buy.

DRI/McGraw-Hill, an economic consulting service, estimates that this lower level
of military spending "probably cuts one-quarter of a percentage point off
economic growth," said David Wyss, DRI's chief economist. "That is a
considerable drag in a nearly stagnant economy growing at less than 1.5 percent
a year."

Nor has the drain ended. Continued cutbacks by military contractors sliced
17,000 jobs in July, the biggest single-month decline in military contractor
employment since the recession began in July 1990. Certain areas, like Southern
California, are being hit especially hard. And industry executives suggest
considerable shrinkage is still to come.

For four decades, military spending has accounted for an average of more than 7
percent of the nation's annual output of goods and services, seldom falling
below 5 percent even during earlier cutbacks. Today that level has shrunk to
just about 5.5 percent of the gross domestic product, and most projections see
it sinking below 4 percent by 1997.

"The impact is bigger than you can see by just looking at the numbers," said
Herbert Stein, a senior economist at the American Enterprise Institute.

Two other big cutbacks in military spending have occurred since the cold war
began in 1950, after the Korean War and after Vietnam. But neither hit the
economy with as much force as the current reduction in military spending.

Soaring consumer demand, very much absent today, helped to offset the military
cutback in the early 1950's. "It was only after the Korean War that Americans
finally decided that we would not go back to the Great Depression, and they let
go and spent," said Robert Gordon, a Northwestern University economist.

The continuing Government outlays for Lyndon Johnson's Great Society programs --
economic stimulus also absent today -- helped to counteract the Vietnam military
cutback, which began in 1968. Even so, both cutbacks contributed to brief
recessions, in 1957-1958 and in 1970.

This time, military spending actually peaked as far back as the fiscal year
1985, and has been falling ever since. But much of the damage to the economy --
and particularly to jobs -- did not hit until more recently. As long as the cold
war held out the promise of renewed weapons making, military contractors waited
out the lean years -- as they did in the 1950's and 1960's -- keeping their
operations largely intact. But with the abrupt dissolution of the Soviet Union,
that promise is gone.

Now leading military companies like General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft, Raytheon
and General Electric are shrinking their operations in anticipation of
permanently lower sales, and their actions will ripple through the economy as
workers lose jobs.

"We don't see the traditional rebound that has characterized downturns in
defense spending in the past, and we are preparing ourselves on that basis,"
said James Cunnane, a senior vice president at General Dynamics, which makes
warplanes, armored vehicles and submarines.

In just 19 months, General Dynamics has eliminated 17,000 jobs, shrinking its
work force by nearly 20 percent. And there have been similar rapid layoffs
across the industry, as military contractors increasingly find themselves
behaving as any other company forced to compete for shrinking business would.

"There used to be more contracts and the revenue base was bigger so you could
support more costs, but those days are gone," said Sheldon Rutstein, chief
financial officer at Raytheon, maker of the Patriot Missile and other military
hardware. Raytheon, which held employment in its military operations above
75,000 through 1990, has now reduced its work force to 68,200.

"We are well aware that our competitors are taking similar steps," Mr. Rutstein
said, "so we have to be one step better to be in a position to pull in the next
contract."

Employment
Timing of Layoffs Couldn't Be Worse

Nowhere is the effect of the more vigorous cutbacks in the military supply
industry more evident than in the Labor Department's monthly employment
statistics.

Until the summer of 1990, employment at military contractors -- the hundreds of
companies that receive 50 percent or more of their revenues from sales to the
military -- hardly fell. The job rolls at these companies, which reached a high
of 1.44 million in 1987, declined by only 33,000 in the following three years.

"For a long time, people in the industry thought they would get well, that
orders would rise, but the orders clearly were not coming," said Gordon Adams,
director of the Defense Budget Project at the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, a Washington research group.

When the Berlin wall fell and the Soviet Union collapsed, the reductions began
in earnest. Beginning in the middle of 1990, employment at military contractors
plunged by more than 100,000 a year, falling to 1.19 million last month. That
decline -- of some 225,000 people -- represents 15 percent of the 1.47 million
jobs that have disappeared during the current recession, which began in July
1990.

"The timing for such steps could not have been worse," said John E. Bregger, an
economist at the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Just when we
need a boost from defense, we get a negative."

Many jobs are being lost in California and the Northeast, but hundreds of
communities elsewhere are also affected as the contractors slice orders to their
suppliers. General Electric's Aerospace division, for example, is shrinking its
network of about 2,000 suppliers by 50 percent -- using the best supplier of,
say, wire harnesses to sell to all of G.E.'s 13 aerospace plants, instead of
having each plant buy from a different company.

Compounding the problem, military workers earn among the highest hourly wages in
the nation, usually well above the national average of $10.58 an hour. When
their jobs disappear, consumer spending, on which a recovery depends, suffers
more than if a lower-paid retail store clerk or office worker is laid off.

What's more, the armed forces have shed 160,000 people since 1990, and now stand
at just over two million men and women. That is only 1.6 percent of the total
labor force -- the lowest percentage since World War II. The cutback has been
particularly painful for high school graduates, especially minorities, for whom
the armed services have been an important source of jobs. Blacks account for
20.6 percent of the men and women in the military.

Remedies
Conversion Proves To Be Difficult

Despite the bounty of military spending, critics like Robert M. Solow, the Nobel
laureate in economic science, and Albert T. Sommers, senior economist at the
Conference Board, have argued that the same money used to develop civilian
technologies could have made the United States more competitive with other
nations, not less competitive. The same dollars invested in rapid transit or
housing or fiber-optic networks, they say, might have created more jobs and more
national wealth than the investment in weaponry.

"It is crazy that we should need to have defense lead the way in public
spending," said Paul Krugman, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

But the question now is whether, as military spending shrinks, any other source
of spending or investment will take its place. The cold war persuaded Americans
to support big Government outlays for weapons, even running up big budget
deficits in the process. But now that the Soviet Union has disappeared as an
enemy, there appears to be little national resolve to divert such huge sums into
other public spending -- even spending that is thought to lay the foundation for
a stronger economy and greater productivity later.

The Bush Administration and the military contractors themselves are trying
various remedies. Some $7 billion in Federal money has been earmarked to promote
conversion to civilian production, through grants for job training and
communities dependent on military contractors. In St. Louis, for instance,
McDonnell-Douglas has laid off 10,000 workers in the last 18 months.

But conversion is difficult in a recession, when existing manufacturers of
consumer goods or machinery cannot sell what they already produce. Even small
companies like Essex Industries in St. Louis, which has switched from making
breathing devices for pilots to oxygen equipment for patients, do not make an
immediate contribution to the economy. Employment at Essex has shrunk from 500
to 400 and raises are scarce for workers whose average pay is $12 an hour. "We
were in a position to grant a 4 percent raise in February, and we hope we can
grant another in the future, but only if the company performs well enough," said
Eugene Corn, a vice president. "To put it simplistically, there is a dry period
between the time you develop a product and the time you can sell it, and we are
in that valley now."

Rather than convert, the leading military contractors are turning to exports for
relief. Raytheon, for example, hopes that by 1996, it can export 40 percent of
its radars, missiles and tactical weapons, up from 20 percent today.

But with the end of the cold war, there is a lot of competition abroad. The
former Soviet Union is also trying to sell its military hardware, as the FMC
Corporation's Ground Systems division in San Jose, Calif., discovered. The
company lined up a sale of armored personnel carriers to the United Arab
Emirates, only to learn that the Emirates decided to buy used equipment from
Russia instead.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Big Drop in Military Budget" show military spending authority
in constant dollars, by fiscal year, 1981-1993 (projected) and employment in
military-related industries, quarterly figues in millions, seasonally adjusted,
1985-1992 (projected). (Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics) (pg. D2)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Knew of Possible Survivors In Indochina, Reagan Aides Say

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1676 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


Three top Reagan Administration officials responsible for tracking the cases of
United States servicemen missing in Vietnam said today that the Government had
known for nearly 20 years that some American prisoners of war may have been
alive in Indochina when troops were withdrawn in 1973.

But in testimony to the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs the
three officials expressed doubts that any prisoners remained alive in captivity
now.

U.S. Lost Its Chance

The officials, part of an Administration that sought to focus new attention on
the issue in the 1980's, testified that they had always assumed that there were
American prisoners of war alive in Indochina in 1973. They also charged that the
United States lost its best chance of finding out what happened to all
unaccounted-for Americans by not pressing the issue forcefully in the years
immediately after its withdrawal from Indochina.

"In the period when the trail was hot, when there should have been a full-court
press, the effort was less, not more," Lieut. Gen. Leonard H. Perroots, head of
the Defense Intelligence Agency from 1985 to 1988, told the committee. He was
referring to the Administrations of Richard M. Nixon, Gerald Ford and Jimmy
Carter.

The others who testified today were Richard T. Childress, a staff member on
President Reagan's National Security Council, and Richard Armitage, a former
Assistant Defense Secretary.

But officials of previous Administrations insist they did all they could to
ascertain the status of American servicemen missing in Vietnam in the early
1970's, and they deny they were negligent in any way. [Page A6.]

In recent weeks, in many hours of testimony and through the declassification of
more than a million Pentagon and White House documents now making their way into
the public domain, the Senate committee has been developing a fuller account of
the Government's handling of the missing servicemen.

But the picture still remains incomplete, and there is contradictory evidence.
Despite the contradictions, what is gradually emerging, in the view of many
members of the committee, are new details on nearly two decades of United States
and Vietnamese actions and contacts giving greater credence to the claims of the
families of missing Americans.

The United States lists 2,266 Americans as unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
About half of these are known to have died, but their remains have not been
recovered. Of the rest, 130 to 135 fall into the category of prisoners who may
have been alive in captivity in 1973, according to Defense Department officials
and investigations by the Senate committee drawing on information about these
servicemen's last known whereabouts.

It is this group that has become the focus of a new investigation into the issue
of the missing. The status of the others is unknown, and they are listed as
missing in action.

Over the years, many officials have suggested that there were American
servicemen unaccounted for in Indochina, many of them pilots shot down during
the war. But the statements today represented an unusual public confirmation at
a time when the issue has re-emerged.

The issue of the missing has now been split effectively into two questions: how
many people where unaccounted for in 1973, when American troops came home, and
how many of this number might be living Americans who survived in captivity
after that.

Several officials involved in accounting in the Nixon years have testified that
while they knew prisoners had not returned as expected, they assumed virtually
all had died at some point in captivity, although Vietnamese, Laotian and
Cambodian officials never explained why they were not returned. Other officials
disagree, saying that they believed prisoners did survive, though only one,
Robert Garwood, a Marine, later came home.

Allusion to Vietnam Offer

Mr. Childress raised the possibility in testimony today that Americans may have
survived into the 1980's when he alluded to an offer said to have been made by
Vietnam through a third country for the release of Americans in return for
development aid. Mr. Childress said that the offer was "followed back to Vietnam
" in the mid-1980's, but that there were no prisoners.

The committee chairman, Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, cut
off further discussion of Mr. Childress's assertions and said the panel would
hear the details in closed session.

This was the second report the committee had received of purported approaches by
Vietnam in the 1980's through intermediary countries, suggesting the exchange of
prisoners for money or pledges of aid.

A former State Department official close to the issue said in an interview today
that offers like these have been appearing since the 1960's. All of them have
been proved fraudulent, he said.

Hanoi Says All Returned

Vietnam has always insisted it returned all prisoners in 1973. It has returned
several hundred sets of remains since then.

In a summing up of recent testimony on Government actions on the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issue and the private interventions of Ross Perot, who made several trips to
Indochina in search of information on the missing, Senator Kerry said that
"there is really no mystery about where this cry of conspiracy comes from."

"This issue that has haunted America for 20 years has not haunted it falsely,"
he said, after General Perroots, Mr. Childress and Mr. Armitage, who now heads
the relief program for the ex-Soviet republics, all said that there had been no
full accounting for servicemen in 1973 and that there has still been no full
accounting today.

In a key exchange, Senator Kerry said, "So if it's true that we do not have a
full accounting as we sit here today in 1992, it has to be equally as true that
we did not have a full accounting in 1973 when we left Vietnam; is that true?"
All three officials agreed.

They added that they had been saying this for years, in meetings and speeches to
family groups. They welcomed the declassification of documents, saying that
secrecy had only contributed to allegations of cover-ups from the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
lobby and accusations from others that the issue of the missing was a political
campaign without foundation in fact.

Henry A. Kissinger, who was President Nixon's national security adviser in 1973,
said Tuesday on the ABC News program "Nightline" that he had never been
satisfied with Vietnam's accounting for the missing, although President Nixon
announced on March 29 of that year that all prisoners were home. In "Years of
Upheaval," his memoirs covering that period, Mr. Kissinger wrote of taking 80
names of missing Americans to Indochina in the the summer of 1973 to ask
officials to account for them.

In several months of testimony and extensive investigation, the Senate Select
Committee has produced a list of 133 names of people who were reliably reported
to be in captivity in Vietnam or Laos in 1973, but who did not come home in
prisoner exchanges.

The Defense Department has a similar list of 135 "discrepancy cases," where
there is enough information about the last known location of apparently live
Americans to suggest that Hanoi knows what happened to them.

"Vietnam can easily account for hundreds of Americans," Mr. Childress, who made
a number of trips to Hanoi in the 1980's, told the committee today. He added
that he believed there were "elements in the politburo" who had decided not to
cooperate more.

Mr. Armitage, a fluent Vietnamese speaker who spent four years in South Vietnam
during the war and also led delegations to Hanoi, said that to make headway on
the resolution of cases believed to be soluble, "the Governments of Vietnam and
Laos, and what passes for the Government of Cambodia, will have to open up and
give us full access to their records."

Unanswered questions about the missing are the chief reason Washington has not
normalized relations with Vietnam or lifted an economic embargo against Hanoi.

The three Reagan Administration officials said they had no hard evidence that
Americans remained alive in Indochina now, but all added that they believed it
was possible. They said some servicemen might have stayed behind of their own
volition and could account for some if not all of the live sightings of people
identified as Americans in recent years.

"I don't think there's an organized, institutionalized effort to hold a lot of
people," said General Perroots.

Mr. Armitage said: "There are Americans in Indochina. I don't know the
circumstances. They may be living freely."

The officials said there had been no conspiracy by the Government to cover up
evidence of living Americans. But General Perroots said there were times when
the Government should have worked harder to resolve the question of the missing.

The Reagan Administration years were critical to the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue because
the White House gave considerable encouragement to family groups and other
lobbyists who sought to give the problem a high political profile.

Critics of the policy say that the Reagan Administration raised false hopes,
while actually doing little to solve the problem.

As the committee's work has clarified some questions, it has also produced new
conflicting accounts. On Tuesday, for example, Mr. Perot and McMurtrie Godley, a
former United States Ambassador to Laos, presented diametrically opposed
accounts of a briefing for Mr. Perot at the United States Embassy in Vientiane
in 1970. Both were under oath. Today in closed session, the Central Intelligence
Agency station chief in Laos at the time was reported to have supported the
Ambassador's recollections.

Though Mr. Armitage and Mr. Perot both say they believe that prisoners remained
in Indochina when the United States withdrew its troops, they have disagreed
over whether Americans are still in captivity. Mr. Perot, who takes the position
that many Americans are still prisoners, has waged a campaign to discredit Mr.
Armitage and his handling of the issue during the Reagan years.


LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "In the period when the trail was hot, when there should have
been a full-court press, the effort was less, not more," said Lieut. Gen.
Leonard H. Perroots, former head of the Defense Intelligence Agency, of the
Government's failure to act on finding out what happened to all Americans
unaccounted for. He appeared before a Senate committee. (George Tames for The
New York Times) (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 28 words


This issue that has haunted America for 20 years has not haunted it falsely. --
SENATOR JOHN F. KERRY, on Americans unaccounted for since the Vietnam War.
[A6:2.]

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

EX-OFFICIALS DENY LAXNESS ON M.I.A.'S

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


Former American officials insist they did all they could to ascertain the status
of American servicemen missing in Vietnam in the early 1970's, and they deny
they were negligent in any way.

Moreover, the former officials said they did not knowingly abandoned any
American servicemen who fought in Indochina.

The comments came in response to Congressional testimony this week suggesting
that American prisoners of war may have been left behind in Vietnam after
American forces withdrew in 1973.

In an address to the nation on March 29, 1973, President Richard M. Nixon said,
"All of our American P.O.W.'s are on their way home."

The former officials said today that they gave Vietnam large amounts of
information about the last known whereabouts of missing American servicemen, in
the hope that Vietnam would provide the fullest possible accounting of the
missing men.

Now, those officials say, their efforts are being misinterpreted to suggest that
the United States Government knew some of the servicemen were still alive in
captivity in the early 1970's.

Putting Pressure on Hanoi

Frank A. Sieverts, a former State Department official who worked on the issue
from 1966 to 1978, said that in supplying information about American servicemen
to Hanoi, "we would shade the interpretation of cases and lists in a favorable
direction, in the direction of saying, 'We know you have more information.' "

In dealing with the Vietnamese, American officials say they operated on the
assumption that the missing servicemen were alive, and they tried to convey that
impression to the Vietnamese, because they wanted to put pressure on Hanoi to
locate and return the Americans.

But that approach seems to have raised false hopes among relatives of the
missing servicemen, the officials now say. "The difficulty," Mr. Sieverts said,
"was that if you overstated that assumption for a domestic audience, you would
create what was clearly an exaggerated and possibly an entirely false hope among
the families, among many thousands of Americans who needed to deal suddenly with
the reality and the grief that their men weren't coming back."

Henry A. Kissinger, who was President Nixon's national security adviser and then
Secretary of State, dismissed the idea that American officials knowingly allowed
American servicemen to remain in Vietnam after the signing of the Paris peace
accords in January 1973.

"It is an outrage to suggest that we would knowingly leave Americans in the
hands of the Communists.," Mr. Kissinger said Tuesday on the ABC News program
"Nightline."

Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the National League of P.O.W./M.I.A.
Families, welcomed today's testimony by Reagan Administration officials.

"From 1973 to 1981, successive administrations and the American body politic
ignored substantive information that there were Americans last known to be alive
in captivity who did not return from the Vietnam War," Mrs. Griffiths said.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senate Panel Cites Hatfield For Failing to Report Gifts

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 12


The Senate ethics committee concluded today that Senator Mark O. Hatfield,
Republican of Oregon, had violated Federal law and Senate rules by failing to
report expensive gifts he had received.

The panel formally rebuked him, a step less severe than censure or expulsion and
one that requires no further action by the full Senate. It concluded that Mr.
Hatfield had "demonstrated a serious lack of concern for, and negligence in
connection with, his legal obligation to disclose such gifts."

Mr. Hatfield, observing that the committee had not found his failures to be
"intentional," said he accepted its findings. "I regret if my mistakes in any
way reflected upon the United States Senate," he said in a statement issued
here.

A Mild Reprimand

The committee's vote was 5 to 1. The dissenting vote was cast by Senator Richard
H. Bryan, Democrat of Nevada, who said he had wanted the language of the
committee decision to be stronger. But when asked, he would not say whether he
had wanted the panel to take stronger action. The committee could have
recommended harsher discipline, including censure or expulsion, either of which
would have required a vote of the full Senate.

In all cases, the committee said, it found no connections between the gifts and
the Senator's official actions.

But the failure to report the gifts violated the civil provisions of the Ethics
in Government Act of 1978 and Senate rules. Both require senators to report all
gifts valued at more than $100.

A Senior Senator

Senator Hatfield, who took office in 1967, is the Senate's eighth most senior
member and its second-longest serving Republican. He was a leading sponsor of
Senate efforts to end the war in Vietnam, and in the 1980's he was an
enthusiastic supporter of efforts to freeze United States and Soviet nuclear
weapons.

Senator Hatfield is 70 years old, and his current term ends in 1996. He won
re-election in 1984 despite charges that his wife had received a real estate fee
for performing little or no services from someone who had sought support from
the Senator for a pipeline project. The Hatfields apologized, promised to give
the money to charity and asked Oregonians to forgive them.

The Ethics Committee, which has been reviewing the latest case for more than a
year, found especially improper his failure to report promptly gifts from the
University of South Carolina and its president, Dr. James Holderman.

Mr. Holderman resigned in 1990 amid criticism of his lavish spending habits. In
May 1991 he pleaded guilty to receiving extra compensation and pleaded no
contest to state tax evasion charges. He was sentenced to five years' probation.


'My Mistakes Were Many'

Senator Hatfield received gifts while chairman and later while the ranking
minority member of the Senate Appropriations Committee. The ethics committee
said today that while there was no evidence of any connection between Mr.
Hatfield's actions and the gifts, it was inappropriate for him to fail to
disclose them when he was "being asked to take routine official actions which
affected the university."

The unreported gifts included a Steuben glass cross valued at $3,875 and a
framed Audubon wild turkey print worth $3,336.

Mr. Hatfield said: "My mistakes were many, and my omissions were serious. There
is no one but myself to blame, and I take full responsibility. I'm the one who
signs the forms, and I am the one who is responsible for making sure that every
gift, every financial transaction is fully disclosed as required."

Other gifts the Senator failed to record properly included $17,000 in home
improvements paid for by a friend, Dorothy Cook, and the forgiving of loans made
to him by former Representative John Dellenback of Oregon, who headed an
organization of religious colleges in the 1980's.

NAME: Mark O. Hatfield

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Mark O. Hatfield (Paul Conklin)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
A Life of Ali, Who Fought for Prize and Principle

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


The life of Muhammad Ali has extraordinary highs and lows, from the surprise
victory over Sonny Liston in 1964, which made him the heavyweight champion of
the world, to his continuing battle against Parkinson's syndrome. There is more
than enough material here for a novel or a Spike Lee film. In the new play
"Ali," Geoffrey C. Ewing and Graydon Royce brush in the highlights and succeed
in jogging one's memory about this admirable athlete, a man of principle as well
as punch even as he became a self-made egotist. He was, as he proclaimed, the
Greatest, and he had the record to prove it, a record that was interrupted
during his prime years when he was stripped of his title because he protested
against being drafted for service in the Vietnam War.

As it turns out, there is more heat in Mr. Ewing's performance in the title role
than in the monodrama he and his collaborator have constructed around Ali's
life. As directed by Stephen Henderson, Mr. Ewing is an artful imitator of his
character, assuming the muffled voice of Ali today as well as the boisterous
braggadocio of the young champion. But the play is an episodic collage, pasted
together from public statements and interviews, testimony from others and
guesswork on the part of the authors.

Although Mr. Ewing is the only person onstage at the John Houseman Studio
Theater, the play continually alters its point of view. It begins as a lecture,
Ali on the road talking about his career, then shifts back to his Olympic days
as Cassius Clay. Periodically, the character stops talking and relives bouts
(one man pummeling the air in a ring onstage) while the audience hears a
blow-by-blow description.

During all this there are dramatic inconsistencies. At various moments, Mr.
Ewing addresses the audience as itself, as a group of reporters and as the
equivalent of his own reflective conscience. Frequently, he steps out of
character to play someone else, including Howard Cosell (whom he mimics
effectively). There are also reconstructed scenes with friends and opponents,
some of whom, like Liston and Joe Frazier, could command their own time onstage
in a more populated play.

"Ali" should have, but does not have, the drama and the trajectory of the
fighter's meteoric career as three-time heavyweight champion. What it does have
is an actor with empathy for his subject and an ability to communicate that
identification on stage. Mr. Ewing conveys both the athleticism of the man in
the ring and the theatricality of a competitor who decided to pretend to be a
villain, adapting this role from the wrestler Gorgeous George.

Despite that image, Ali retained his ingenuousness. There was always a teasing
comic side to his insults as he tried to put his foes off balance. Mr. Ewing
demonstrates that beneath the bravado was an insecurity, a need to bolster his
confidence before every encounter.

Ali also has his heroic dimensions, both in his dedication to his religious
beliefs at the expense of his career and in his activities as an unofficial
ambassador of goodwill. In contrast to Mike Tyson, among others, he became a
role model. To its credit, the play avoids sanctimony, even as Ali recalls his
worldwide celebrity.

In the program, Mr. Ewing enumerates the many occupations he has pursued in
addition to acting. These do not include boxing. But with the help of Ron
Lipton, an Ali sparring partner acting as fight choreographer, he simulates the
sinew and suppleness of the fighter who could "float like a butterfly, sting
like a bee." Even in retirement, Ali still floats, still stings. At the age of
50, the play's Ali measures the field of heavyweight contenders and jokingly
suggests that it may be time to stage another comeback, perhaps against George
Foreman.

Ali

Conceived by Geoffrey C. Ewing; written by Mr. Ewing and Graydon Royce;
Performed by Mr. Ewing; directed by Stephen Henderson; boxing choreography by
Ron Lipton; set by Sirocco D. Wilson; costumes by Ann Rubin; lighting by Robert
Bessoir; sound by Tom Gould; production stage manager, Patricia Flynn. Presented
by Eric Krebs Theatrical Management. At the John Houseman Studio Theater, 450
West 42d Street, Clinton.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Geoffrey C. Ewing in the title role of the new play "Ali," which
he co-wrote with Graydon Royce. (William Gibson/Martha Swope Associates)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Barbara Bush;
First Lady on Abortion: Not a Platform Issue

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


Days after Republicans finished work on a platform that takes an uncompromising
anti-abortion stance, Barbara Bush has told interviewers that she does not
believe that the issue has any place in the party's platform.

"I'm not being outspoken or pro or con abortion," Mrs. Bush said in an interview
with news magazine reporters on Wednesday that was made public today. "I'm
saying abortion should not be in there, either pro or con."

The First Lady said abortion was a "personal thing," and added, "The personal
things should be left out of, in my opinion, platforms and conventions."

In another peppery session with reporters, this one today, the First Lady
criticized the Republican Party chairman, Richard N. Bond, for attacking Hillary
Clinton, blamed the news media for the "ugly" personal tone of the 1992 campaign
and made a point of mentioning Gov. Bill Clinton's private life.

"He never denied he had a fling, did he?" she said.

Mrs. Bush's comments on abortion came as the Republican Party struggles to
retain the loyalty of its conservative wing without alienating voters who favor
abortion rights. The platform that will be approved at the party's convention in
Houston next week advocates a constitutional amendment banning abortions in all
cases.

President Bush had struck a more compromising tone in an NBC television
interview Tuesday night, when he said he would stand by a granddaughter who
chose to have an abortion.

Mrs. Bush's view, expressed in one of a series of interviews she granted before
the convention, marks a sharp break with her practice of not speaking out on
policy matters.

Mrs. Bush has declined to state her own views on abortion for years, but her
friends say she privately favors abortion rights. Her comments about the
platform could have been intended as a signal to pro-choice Republicans that
they have a sympathetic ear in the White House.

By expressing compassion for homosexuals, unwed mothers and people with AIDS,
Mrs. Bush has won praise from groups that find fault with her husband.

Showing Her Steely Side

But in this week's interviews, the First Lady that most voters know only as a
kindly, snowy-haired grandmother showed the steely side of her nature that she
has mostly kept hidden since her quip about the Democratic Vice-Presidential
candidate Geraldine Ferraro ("a word I can't say, but it rhymes with rich" ), in
the 1984 Presidential campaign.

Mrs. Bush called recent reports raising questions about her husband's private
life "disgusting" and "hurtful."

She also aimed a dart at one of her husband's top political advisers when she
deplored his comments about Mrs. Clinton.

Mr. Bond, the Republican national chairman, often disparages Mrs. Clinton's
credentials as a wife and mother, using her legal writings from the 1970's to
suggest she thinks that children should be able to sue their parents and that
marriage is a form of slavery.

Mrs. Bush said, "I don't like it," when asked about Mr. Bond's critical remarks
about Mrs. Clinton's views on children and marriage. "She is not running for
office," the First Lady added.

She said she also had not liked the scrutiny of Mr. Clinton's personal life
during the primaries but added that some issues, like questions about how he
avoided the draft during the Vietnam War, were fair. "He had a few problems with
the draft," she said. "If he lied, I'm not sure it wasn't legitimate."

And after her comment that Mr. Clinton "never denied he had a fling," she went
on to say, "I think George Bush should not be smeared with the same brush when
he didn't."

Health Rumors Called 'Nutty'

She dismissed questions about her husband's health, mocking rumors that he would
require heart surgery after the election as "nutty." Mrs. Bush insisted her
husband was "the strongest man in the world," and then asked in stern tones, "Do
you think I would let the person I love more than life run for public office if
he needed open heart surgery after the campaign?"

And, repeating a charge made by several Republican campaign aides this week,
Mrs. Bush also accused the press of favoring Mr. Clinton over her husband. When
asked why she thought reporters were biased, she replied with a smile that was
more cold than coy, "I'll be damned if I know, unless they are just liberals."

At turns combative, forbidding and self-deprecating, Mrs. Bush insisted in the
interview today that she would continue to be silent about her own views on
abortion, saying she was merely her husband's spouse. On Wednesday she had
supported her husband's comment about abortion and stressed that parents or
grandparents could not force a child to have an unwanted baby.

Noting that Mr. Bush had also said he would counsel the child against having an
abortion, Mrs. Bush said: "But you can't pin a child down and say, 'You can't
have an abortion.' That's against the law.' "

George Stephanopoulos, the communications director for the Clinton-Gore
campaign, said Mrs. Bush's remarks on abortion were proof that the President and
his wife privately favored abortion rights.

"Nobody's ever questioned that the Bushes' personal feelings about abortion are
pro-choice," Mr. Stephanopoulos said. "Everything they say and do seems to
indicate that."

On her scolding of Mr. Bond, Mr. Stephanopoulos said: "It makes you wonder
what's going on over there. I think she does have the last word on that one."

Symbol of Wifeliness

Conservative Republicans, who hold Mrs. Bush up as a symbol of traditional
wifeliness, were careful to defend their anti-abortion platform without
disparaging her.

"I think the party platform committee has spoken," Representative Robert S.
Walker of Pennsylvania, a leader of the anti-abortion forces on the platform
committee, said today. "It's going to be a part of our platform and most of us
think it's a good issue for us."

Many Republicans think Mrs. Bush is immune from criticism no matter what she
says; they call the popular First Lady their "secret weapon."

"Her whole persona is apolitical," Torie Clarke, the campaign spokeswoman, said
last week. "That gives her a tremendous amount of credibility."

Mrs. Bush said in the interview that it was "easy" for people to like her. Polls
show that voters like her twice as much as they like her husband. "I don't make
any decisions," she said. "I just go blindly on on my own dumb way and have fun
and try to be helpful."

She was being modest, as is her wont. In the fevered imaginations of Democratic
and Republican campaign aides, at least, America's Everymom has turned into
Rambo.

"The rumor is she's going negative," said one Clinton adviser, who spoke on
condition of anonymity. He was referring, fearfully, to the speech on "family
values" that Mrs. Bush is scheduled to deliver next Wednesday night at the
convention.

"Don't get her mad," warned Michael Murphy, a political consultant who is a
member of the Bush-Quayle media team. "Don't attack her kids."

Mr. Murphy said he feared that Clinton aides would criticize the Bushes' sons,
but he almost seemed to relish the vision of the First Lady unleashed. "If
Clinton tries anything with her -- they'll be nothing left but his hair."

Even her oldest son, George, spoke with awe of his mother's mettle. "The last
thing Barbara Bush will allow is a bunch of political hacks to threaten her," he
said. "She is not going to let Bill Clinton write her speech."

But Mrs. Bush played down expectations about remarks she is to make on what
Republicans are calling Family Values Night at their convention. "It's not going
to be a great speech," she insisted. Calling it just a "little Mighty Mouse" of
an address, she added: "I mean, it's nothing.  Don't expect anything."

NAME: Barbara Bush

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barbara Bush during an interview yesterday in the private
quarters of the White House. The photograph shows President and Mrs. Bush during
a meeting with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Mitterrand Will Send Troops Only to Protect Bosnia Relief

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 13


Amid mounting calls in Europe for direct military intervention in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, President Francois Mitterrand said today that France would go no
further than offering troops to protect relief missions in the former Yugoslav
republic.

"A purely military campaign would be a forbidding ordeal," the French President
said in an interview with the daily Sud-Ouest. "While diplomats talk, the blood
flows, the emergency is extreme. So let's act quickly. But to add war to war
will resolve nothing."

Mr. Mitterrand responded from his vacation home at Latche in southwest France
after several prominent French politicians, including the leader of the
governing Socialist Party, demanded air strikes against Serbian artillery
positions being used to attack Sarajevo and other Bosnian towns.

"If I understand the intent of those calling for bombing, I do not share their
conviction," he said. "The nature of the terrain and of the weapons being used
down there would render such a method useless." He ruled out any French action
outside the framework of the United Nations.

The French leader's caution echoed that of other European governments that
despite growing public outrage at Serbian use of violence, "ethnic cleansing"
and detention camps against Bosnia's Muslims, have also expressed deep fears of
being sucked into a Vietnam-like quagmire.

Britain and Germany are unwilling to contribute troops to this United Nations
peacekeeping effort, while Italy's Defense Minister, Salvo Ando, has expressed
"great skepticism" over the feasibility of sending in soldiers to protect
convoys carrying food and medicine into Bosnia.

"These men would have to be ready to face a guerrilla war that could last a long
time and be spread over an area far bigger than the one in which the fighting is
taking place," he said in an interview with the daily Avanti! "And who would
provide the troops needed?"

In advance of the United Nations Security Council move to use "all necessary
means" to insure delivery of relief aid to Bosnia, France has been the only
European country to play a significant role in the 15,000-member United Nations
force already in place.

France's Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, said Wednesday that "we have not found
many volunteers" to help carry out the Security Council resolution. France has
already assigned 2,600 troops to the United Nations force, while Belgium,
Denmark and the Netherlands have offered to play some role.

Greece, which borders on former Yugoslavia and has strong ties to Serbia, said
today it opposed any military intervention in Bosnia. "We will not participate
and believe that such action will not help but rather will complicate matters,"
Foreign Minister Michael Papaconstantinou said.

With no consensus among its nine members, a regional military pact known as the
Western European Union met in Rome today to consider options, including
tightening the naval blockade of Serbia and Montenegro.

Demands that Europe "do something" nonetheless continue to be fed by images and
reports of atrocities in Bosnia as well as by political figures such as
Britain's former Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, France's opposition leader,
Jacques Chirac, and the European Community's Executive President, Jacques
Delors.

In Geneva, reporting on visits to 12 detention camps run by Serbs, Croats and
Moslems in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Committee for the Red Cross
said today that combatants were engaged in "systematic use of brutality" and
that innocent civilians were victims of "inhuman treatment."

The United Nations Human Rights Commission, meeting in emergency session in
Geneva today, also heard an account of atrocities taking place in Serb-run camps
from Bosnia's Vice President, Ejup Ganic. "Men are beaten with metal rods, sharp
instruments and wooden clubs," he said. "People are decapitated and men are
castrated. Women are raped and mutilated."

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Indochina's Missing: An Issue That Refuses to Die

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


On the evening of March 29, 1973, President Richard M. Nixon, eager to put the
Vietnam War behind him, told a national television and radio audience that the
time had come to bring down the curtain on the Vietnam experience.

"Tonight, the day we have all worked and prayed for has finally come," he said.
"For the first time in 12 years, no American military forces are in Vietnam. All
our American P.O.W.'s are on their way home."

For some who served -- and who waited -- the words rang hollow the moment they
were uttered. Neither statement was true: American forces, some of them suddenly
metamorphosed into civilian advisers, had remained behind in Indochina. And, as
newly released documents are now confirming, Administration officials knew that
not all the prisoners had returned when the last of 591 men came home that week.


'Not Reading the Reports'

"We sat around and laughed," John F. King, an Army intelligence specialist at
the time, recalled in an interview today. "We said, 'Hey, he's not reading the
reports we're sending him.' "

Mr. King, now director of public affairs for the Vietnam Veterans of America,
was on a team assigned to interview a small group of returning prisoners of war,
he said. But when Operation Homecoming was over, only one of the men on his list
came back.

The spring of 1973 was neither the beginning nor the end of the bitter
P.O.W-M.I.A. story, which is now woven into the politics of both the United
States and Vietnam and which has become the last hurdle to the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Washington and Hanoi.

A Lack of Trust

"We have to trust each other," Trinh Xuan Lang, Vietnam's chief delegate to the
United Nations, said in an interview last week. But American demands on Hanoi,
he said, "prove there is no trust."

American officials also have doubts.

"We recognized from the outset that reopening negotiations with Vietnam was a
potential minefield," Richard T. Childress, formerly of the National Security
Council, told the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs on Wednesday,
as he recalled the Reagan Administration's efforts to restart talks in the early
1980's after a period of silence.

"Given my experience," he said, "we should never take Vietnamese pledges,
promises or excuses at face value."

Hanoi and Washington began talking about prisoners in the 1966, a year after
American ground troops were introduced into Vietnam.

In 1973, the year the United States withdrew from the war after the Paris peace
accords and prisoner exchanges were carried out, the Nixon Administration
quickly lost what little opportunity or will it had to pursue the issue of
prisoners who did not return.

Officials who worked on the issue during that period have tried to recreate in
Senate committee hearings over the last few months a sense of that turbulent
period, when Americans wanted to put a divisive war behind them, and when the
Nixon Administration was headed into the vortex of the Watergate scandal.

There were a few abortive suggestions that Washington threaten to restart the
war if Hanoi, then moving forces into South Vietnam, did not live up to its
peace treaty pledges to honor Saigon's independence and give a fuller accounting
of the American dead and missing. But Congress would not condone military
action, nor would it agree to pay Hanoi any of the $3.25 billion in
reconstruction aid the Vietnamese say they were promised; Washington regarded it
as a proposal.

"By the end of April 1973, therefore, our strategy for Vietnam was in tatters,"
Henry A. Kissinger, Mr. Nixon's national security adviser, wrote in his memoirs,
"Years of Upheaval."

Lobbies were forming on behalf of the missing, led by the National League of
Families.

Ann Mills Griffiths, the executive director of the League, said its early
activities included demonstrations and filing suit to stop the Pentagon from
making an automatic "presumption of death" judgment in missing cases. Later,
Mrs. Griffiths would serve as a representative of families on many negotiating
trips to Hanoi.

She says she observed a pattern in Hanoi's tactics in which talks would move
forward, and then suddenly stall.

During the Administration of President Gerald Ford, the issue of the missing was
more or less put on hold.

Approach by Carter

When President Jimmy Carter took office, a new approach was made to Hanoi. The
United States moved toward establishing relations, on the theory that the job of
looking for any Americans who may have remained in Vietnam would be easier in a
better climate that provided wider access to the Vietnamese countryside.

The first of a series of reports on the prisoner-missing issue had been released
around the time of Mr. Carter's election. The report, prepared by the House
Select Committee on Missing Persons in Southeast Asia, under the chairmanship of
Representative G. V. Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, concluded that no
Americans were held alive as prisoners in Indochina, but that a partial
accounting of the missing was possible.

Those conclusions have been supported by many officials and subsequent
commissions, though not by many family members.

President Carter's efforts to open links to Hanoi were thwarted by Vietnam's
invasion of Cambodia in 1978.

In the late 1980's, the prisoner-missing issue picked up steam in the United
States as President Ronald Reagan vowed to make an accounting a "national
priority."

Since 1982, the Administrations of Presidents Reagan and Bush pursued a policy
of regular contacts with Hanoi, sending delegations to seek resolution of at
least some of the 2,266 cases of people unaccounted for since the war. In more
than half these cases, servicemen are assumed to have died, but their bodies
have not been recovered.

In 1987, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, was appointed a special presidential envoy to Hanoi. He has been urging
the Vietnamese to open their archives to help solve about 135 "discrepancy
cases," where American officials are convinced by the information they have that
Hanoi must know what happened to the servicemen involved.

In 1991, Hanoi, still hoping for an American embassy, allowed the United States
to open a P.O.W.-M.I.A. office.

Americans insist that Vietnam can do more to resolve the discrepancy cases,
thereby moving the stalled talks on normalizing relations farther along a
hypothetical "road map" devised by the State Department.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/TV Weekend;
Unforeseen Results Of Fighting in the Gulf

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 484 words


Tonight's edition of "20/20" calls attention to veterans of the Persian Gulf war
who say they have been afflicted with strange symptoms since their return home.
The complaints include aching joints, chronic fatigue, bleeding gums, rashes and
loss of hair and memory.

The Pentagon assigned a medical team at Walter Reed Army Hospital to study 79
cases in Indiana, where a disproportionate number have appeared. The head of the
team, Maj. Robert Defraites, attributes 80 percent of the symptoms to the stress
of readjustment to society, a diagnosis that brings sarcastic laughs from the
unhappy group of soldiers Lynn Sherr interviews back home in Indiana.

They say they were healthy until they arrived in the gulf and attribute some of
their current problems to poor sanitary conditions in the camps and pollution of
the water supply by the Iraqi forces. One likens their plight to that of Vietnam
veterans suffering the effects of Agent Orange, whose complaints were dismissed
for years by the Army.

"Why Are We Sick?," one of three segments on tonight's program, is not a
specimen of strenuous reporting. Most of the time is given to variations on the
complaints. No civilian doctors are called on for their opinions. The viewer is
left with little idea of how many people may be affected. And if you find your
gums aching, don't blame the Army. It may just be Ms. Sherr's cliche-clogged
opener: "Now it's a battle for their health, against a faceless, nameless
enemy."

'The Larry Sanders Show'
HBO
Saturdays at 10:30 P.M.

Garry Shandling plays Larry Sanders in this amiable new series about the
adventures of a late-night talk-show host. Each half-hour episode begins,
naturally, with a monologue; tonight Sanders announces that he is not running
for President because he fears that no woman will come forward to say she had
sex with him. Then it's backstage for what passes as the evening's plot.

The opener finds Sanders, a soft-hearted, conscientious sort of nervous wreck
with what seems to be more than his share of teeth, under pressure from a
network virago who demands that he do live commercials for a tool called the
Garden Weasel. No garden joke goes unraked.

The off-screen talk is offbeat enough to be on track, and Mr. Shandling is well
abetted by Rip Torn as his producer and Jeffrey Tambor as the program's stooge.
Their roles are pleasantly quirky, the performances nicely modulated. That
cannot be said for the situations, like the one next week that involves Carol
Burnett and a tarantula; they tend to be anything-for-a-laugh obvious. If the
writers and producers are able to trust a little more in their characters and
resist the broad gags, this may develop into a grown-up show.

20/20
What Happened Over There
ABC, tonight at 10.
(Channel 7 in New York.)
Lynn Sherr, reporter; Fred Peabody, segment producer; Victor Neufeld, executive
producer.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

James R. Allen; Led Airlift Unit And Academy

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


James R. Allen, a retired Air Force general who headed the Military Airlift
Command and served as superintendent of the United States Air Force Academy in
the late 1970's, died on Tuesday of cancer in the hospital at Andrews Air Force
Base in Maryland. He was 66 years old and lived in Alexandria, Va.

A native of Louisville, Ky., General Allen was a 1948 graduate of the United
States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y. He flew combat missions in both the
Korean and Vietnamese wars.

After the Korean conflict he held various posts in the United States and Germany
and then returned to West Point as a faculty member at the Military Academy.

In Vietnam he flew an F-4C as deputy commander for operations of the 12th
Tactical Fighter Wing at Cam Ranh Bay.

Having returned to the United States in 1966, he became deputy commander for
operations of a pilot-training wing at Craig Air Force Base, Ala., held planning
positions at the Pentagon and then commanded the 19th Air Division at Carswell
Air Force Base, Tex.

In the Pentagon post he was a principal architect of a joint Army-Air Force
helicopter raid in 1970 on a camp in North Vietnam, where American prisoners
were believed to be held. No prisoners were found.

In 1973 he was named chief of staff for the Strategic Air Command, and the
following year he took the job of supervising the Air Force Academy in Colorado
Springs, Colo. Three years later, he was promoted to general and appointed chief
of staff at the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in
Brussels.

He was deputy commander of the United States European Command from 1979 to 1981
and led the Military Airlift Command at Scott Air Force Base in Illinois until
his retirement nine years ago.

General Allen is survived by his wife of 40 years, Kathryn A. Allen; a daughter,
Kathryn Lewis Allen of Alexandria; a son, Jeffrey R. Allen of Richmond; a
sister, Susan Frantz of Pittsburgh, and three grandchildren.

NAME: James R. Allen

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. James R. Allen (United Press International, 1976)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


Never mind the cameramen, lighting and sound technicians, producers, directors,
editors that seem to be part of every roving television correspondent's
entourage. ANDERSON COOPER, who leaves for Africa next Saturday on assignment
for Channel 1, the Whittle Communications news service for high schools, will be
a one-man band. He will be found both on camera and behind it in reports from
Somalia, Mozambique, Uganda and South Africa, among other countries, during a
journey that will last from three to four months.

Working alone, he said, allows him to give Channel 1 "stories that other people
are not telling, that networks are not doing because they are too dangerous,
difficult or expensive."

"I will come up with the ideas and then relate them to teen-agers," he
continued. "For example, I want to do a piece on what it is like to be a
teen-ager in Mozambique where there is a huge drought. What is it like to go to
school there and spend most of the day on line for water? In Uganda I will do a
piece on AIDS among young people, and will try to spend a week with a young
person caring for the family because the parents died of AIDS."

Mr. Cooper, who is 25 years old and a graduate of Yale, is the son of Gloria
Vanderbilt and the late Wyatt Cooper.

Last year he did freelance reports for Channel 1 from Myanmar (formerly Burma),
Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam, while taking classes in Vietnamese at the
University of Hanoi.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Republicans: Can They Get It Together?

BYLINE: By Judith Miller;  Judith Miller is the staff writer at The New York
Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4951 words


"You won't find any registered Democrats in this town," says Robert R. Pyle, the
burly, pipe-smoking librarian of Northeast Harbor, Me., a picturesque resort
village 180 miles up the coast from George Bush's summer retreat in
Kennebunkport.

"If you encounter any, they were either abused by their mothers as children or
they're from away," Pyle adds, deploying the local expression for those who've
immigrated from someplace else.

The 46-year-old Pyle says his forebears "have been in these parts for a while."
Since the Mayflower, in fact. The Republican Party seems equally well entrenched
among Maine's 1.2 million residents, having been a dominant political force in
the state since before the Civil War.

Before he was old enough to vote, Pyle campaigned for Barry Goldwater, then
enthusiastically supported Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan and George
Bush. He cheerfully acknowledges that he has never voted for a Democrat for
President.

If anyone in America should be solidly behind George Bush, it should be a G.O.P.
stalwart like Bob Pyle. But this November, Pyle has every intention of voting
against George Bush. Which means that he will actually pull the lever for Bill
Clinton.

"I feel like I'm turning against a friend," Pyle says hesitantly. "This is
painful, hard stuff for me. And I feel sadness, frustration rather than anger.
George Bush -- he's become isolated. He doesn't seem to know what the hell is
happening to us.

"Since the middle of Reagan's term, and especially since Bush, the rich have
gotten richer," he goes on. "The poor have gotten children, and the middle
class, like me, have gotten poor. I'm a pro-lifer in principle, so it's not that
issue that's driving me away. It's the economy. I know that higher taxes were
necessary. I don't hold that against them. It's their insensitivity to its
impact on people. George Bush is becoming the new Herbert Hoover."

Pyle says the Republican Party as a whole is as much to blame as George Bush.
"The middle-class person doesn't have a voice in the party anymore," he says.
"Before the special interests took control -- the PAC's, the wealthy
contributors -- we did."

By embracing special interests, Pyle argues, the G.O.P. has betrayed its own
philosophy. "We used to call a destitute person someone who was 'on the town,' "
he recalls. "We solved our own problems at the local level. But today, the
Federal Government takes over and does nothing for him. I would still prefer a
system in which localities raise their own money and decide how to solve their
own problems. We Mainers don't like to be interfered with. The best place to
make a judgment about what is best for us begins with us. That was what
Republicans used to believe. It was the Democrats who always favored a big
central Government. I won't support four more years of the same."

Down the road at the Docksider Restaurant, Northeast Harbor's most popular
seafood house, the air tingles with the aromas of boiling lobster and political
defection. The Docksider's owners, sisters Brenda and Gail Webber, and two
waitresses, Diana Leonaid and Ann Ritchie, are all "year-rounders," a
designation that distinguishes them from the summer residents. They are also all
registered Republicans who want a new Administration in Washington.

"It's time for some young blood, some new blood," Leonaid, a 47-year-old mother
of two, says.

"We're all fiscal conservatives," says Brenda Webber, 49. "We don't like
Government regulation and the soaring deficits and the tendency to look to
Washington to solve problems. But we haven't lived up to our social
responsibilities. Bush says things aren't that bad. Well, maybe they're not for
him. But they are for us."

As the others nod their heads in fierce agreement, Ritchie, who has five
children, chimes in: "George Bush and his party have total disregard for women.
I mean none." All of the women, it turns out, favor abortion rights -- adamantly
so.

Leonaid says she is a Republican today only because her parents were. "But being
a Republican doesn't mean anything to me anymore."

IF THE REPUBLICAN bastion of Maine, which has only four electoral votes, were
George Bush's only zone of geographic and ideological vulnerability, the Grand
Old Party would have little cause for alarm. But on the eve of the Republican
National Convention, which starts tomorrow in Houston, disenchantment with Bush
can be heard all over the country -- from the very men and women who should be
among his most ardent supporters.

Scores of interviews over the last six weeks with registered Republicans in four
traditional G.O.P. strongholds -- Maine, Orange County, Calif., New Jersey and
Mississippi, places that have almost invariably supported Republican national
tickets since 1968 -- reflect not only bitter disappointment with George Bush,
but also a party deeply divided against itself.

Under George Bush, the party that the late Republican strategist Lee Atwater
dubbed the "big tent," is creaking and groaning from internal strains,
contradictions and rivalries. According to Kevin Phillips, the Republican
analyst, ever since the election of Richard Nixon in 1968, Republicans have
captured the White House by building a coalition of ideologically diverse
constituencies: first, Traditional Conservatives, sometimes called "country
club" or "Rotary Club" Republicans (who represent about 25 percent of the
party's voters); second, Ivy League Moderates, sometimes called Nelson
Rockefeller Republicans (about 10 percent); third, the Religious Right, the
fundamentalist true believers who seemed to worship Ronald Reagan as much as any
deity (about 15 to 20 percent); fourth, the Reagan Democrats, the blue-collar
workers who have voted Republican in the last three Presidential elections (20
percent); fifth, the Anti-Communist Ethnics, the Cubans, Vietnamese and other
immigrant groups galvanized by this single issue (about 3 percent), and last but
certainly not least, given their activism and influence, the Radical Right, a
group that George Bush early in his political career called "the so-called nut
fringe," but which he has assiduously courted ever since (about 5 percent). (The
rest of the G.O.P. voters defy easy categorization.) For years these disparate
constituencies were held together with the glue of prosperity and the common
adversaries of cold war. But today they are bitterly at odds.

Self-identified Republicans -- as opposed to those who merely vote Republican --
are also torn by doctrinal battles. One is over how to fix the economy. Here,
the party faithful are split into what Jack F. Kemp, Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development, calls "New Testament" and "Old Testament" factions --
supply-siders who favor stimulating growth through tax cuts and incentives (as
Ronald Reagan did) versus those who argue that economic salvation is best
achieved by balancing the budget and boldly eliminating the nation's crushing $4
trillion debt (as Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, the ranking Republican
on the Budget Committee, does).

On social issues, like abortion, gay rights and prayer in the schools, the
ideological fault line is between Republican traditionalists -- be they fiscal
conservatives or moderates -- and the religious and ideological right. While
abortion is the ostensible focus of the split, the real source is a far broader
philosophical disagreement between those who oppose Government intervention in
the private realm and those who favor it. In the 1988 Presidential campaign,
economic well-being and Supreme Court protection of the right to an abortion
camouflaged the split. But this year, the depressed economy and the Supreme
Court decision that opened the door to the states' further limiting abortion
rights, have widened and deepened it, leaving both sides feeling betrayed -- and
furious at George Bush.

As right-wing influence within the G.O.P. solidifies in many states, moderates
and even some conservatives warn that the great tent is now pitched so far to
the right on "family values" issues that it is in danger of falling over. "My
party, the party of Abraham Lincoln," a Republican abortion-rights activist
laments, "has become the party of formaldehyde, condoms and fetus-wavers."

The leap of faith by about one-fourth of the electorate to Ross Perot, before
many knew much about the billionaire Texas tycoon's personality and policy
views, reflected voter anger at both parties -- but particularly at the G.O.P.,
from which many of Perot's predominantly white, male, suburban voters came.

Some White House officials initially assumed that because many Perot voters were
Republicans, they would go back to their party after the Texan quit the race he
never formally entered. But polls and interviews show that, so far, the opposite
is true. Last month, the Field Poll of California showed former Perot supporters
backing Clinton in that state 4 to 1. "The professionals may have underestimated
the 'ABB' sentiment, 'Anybody but Bush,' says Tully Plesser, a Republican
consultant.

If there is a bright spot for George Bush in all of this, it is that 74 percent
of the electorate still describes itself as either politically "conservative"
(32 percent) or "moderate" (42 percent), as opposed to the 20 percent which
describes itself as "liberal." And while people mean very different things by
those terms, Everett C. Ladd, director of the Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research in Storrs, Conn., says that a defining feature of conservatism is
skepticism about the capacity of Government to solve problems -- a trend that in
Presidential contests tends to help Republicans, theoretically the party of
Government minimalism.

Also, possible confrontations in Iraq and the Balkans might enable Bush to play
"the military card," which could help him in November.

Another source of consolation for the Bush campaign is that many Republicans,
despite their doubts about the President, remain suspicious both of Bill Clinton
and the Democratic Party. "To us, Bill Clinton is like Gus Hall, a socialist."
says James S. Todhunter, a businessman and conservative activist in Orange
County, Calif. "So, of course, we'll support Bush."

Hazel Frank Gluck, a Republican consultant in Trenton, has come to the same
conclusion for different reasons. "While we pro-choice Republicans are very
disillusioned," she says, "it would be hard for me to vote Democratic."

But a large number of Republican voters interviewed express unqualified contempt
for both Presidential candidates. "They're asking us to choose between a preppy
tie and a hair dryer," says Jim Bright, a 42-year-old lobster fisherman in
Northeast Harbor. Dick Koolhaas, who was born in Holland and for the past 18
years has run a feed store in Perris, Calif., blames both parties for what he
calls "the mess we're in. I'm not making as much for my wife and four kids in a
year as the Congress gave themselves in a single pay increase," he says with
more than a trace of bitterness.

Republican strategists insist that by Election Day many of the disgruntled rank
and file will end their political exile and return to the fold. They dismiss
Bill Clinton's current 20-to-30-point lead over President Bush in the polls by
citing surveys in which 34 percent of the voters say they might still switch
their vote before Nov. 3.

But Kevin Phillips contends that the rumbling of discontent from Republicans is
an unmistakable sign that a fundamental shift in voting patterns is under way.
"Traditionally, Republicans have needed to get about 55 to 60 percent of the
independents to win a Presidential election," Phillips says. "But that assumes
your base is rock solid. And that's a big part of the problem. Different flavors
of rock-rib Republicans are deserting Bush in droves, for very different
reasons."

FOR Republicans, Orange County, Calif., has always been sacred territory. Its
airport is named after John Wayne. Its main cultural attraction is Disneyland.
It still hasn't gotten over Barry Goldwater's failure to win the Presidency in
1964. With 2.5 million residents, Orange County boasts one of the country's most
expensive (though now flat) housing markets and a larger economy than most
countries in Africa and South America.  Since its creation more than a century
ago, the county has been synonymous with affluent, loyalist Republicanism.

If any place should be George Bush country, it is conservative Orange County,
among whose 1.1 million registered voters Republicans outnumber Democrats almost
2 to 1. But in this strange political year, the President cannot take even
Orange County for granted. A poll in mid-July, conducted by The Orange County
Register immediately after Perot's withdrawal, found Bush trailing his
Democratic opponent Bill Clinton by 42.1 to 34.8 percent. The Register announced
its findings as the third in an incredible series of developments over the last
three years: "Berlin Wall falls. McDonald's opens in Moscow. Democratic
Presidential challenger Bill Clinton is ahead in overwhelmingly Republican
Orange County."

Why are Orange County Republicans joining so many other G.O.P. voters across the
country in questioning their allegiance to -- and even deserting -- George Bush?
First and foremost, the President has drawn the wrath of ultraconservatives here
with his unpopular 1990 Congressional budget agreement that broke his "Read My
Lips" pledge not to raise taxes.

But even more damaging to the Administration's standing, the recession has
plunged Orange County, along with the rest of California, into one of the worst
economic slumps since the Depression. Unemployment statewide is more than 1.5
percent above the national average of 7.8 percent. Aerospace, real estate and
banking, three perennially booming sectors, are virtually at a standstill. Two
weeks ago, the influential Register charged the President with having "failed
every bit as much as that last notable failure, Jimmy Carter" and called on him
to quit the race.

"What we have here in California is not merely a bad recession, we are
experiencing a restructuring of the economy," says Larry Thomas, a former press
secretary to then-Vice President Bush and now a senior vice president at the
Irvine Company, a private developer and the county's single largest landowner.
"We are not going to 'come back' in the usual sense. So people are going through
an emotional process similar to a death in the family -- denial, anger,
resentment and eventual acceptance. The problem is that the election is
occurring in the midst of this cycle."

A Republican Assemblyman, Gil Ferguson of Newport Beach, one of the county's
wealtiest communities, says that people are scared. "The biggest business in
Orange County these days is moving vans -- immigrants and people dependent on
the state for welfare, education and health care moving in, and businesses
moving out, fleeing our burdensome regulations."

In a two-way Presidential race, Orange County must deliver a 300,000-vote
surplus "to carry Sodom and Gomorrah in the rest of the state," Ferguson says,
referring to San Francisco and Central Los Angeles, which vote heavily
Democratic. Thus, Republicans would not only have to sustain their 231,000-vote
margin in the county, but also cut into about a fifth of the Democratic vote --
no mean task, given the grim G.O.P. mood. "I don't see conservatives breaking
their necks for Bush," Ferguson says. "I don't see the foot soldiers coming out
for him. They're very independent-minded -- real conservatives, not wishy-washy
Republicans. And George Bush has broken every pledge he made to them, all except
abortion."

The lack of enthusiasm for Bush among the foot soldiers was unmistakable at a
recent meeting in Garden Grove of the Orange County Coordinating Republican
Assembly, the conservative caucus. "Look, George Bush broke his word and raised
taxes," James Todhunter says. "We screamed the loudest and hardest about that.
Bush's campaign slogan ought to be: 'I'm really, really, really sorry. Honest.'
"

Debra Allen, a conservative who is running for a judgeship, says she will
support the President's re-election -- but only secondarily. "We'll work for
Bush, because all of us will be out there working as hard as we can to elect
Bruce Herschensohn to the United States Senate. So while we're out canvassing
and registering voters for Bruce, we'll be carrying Bush-Quayle literature as
well."

An incumbent Republican President is in trouble, political professionals say,
when he must rely on the "upward coattails" of an ultraconservative former
television commentator and candidate for the Senate to carry a state with 54
critical electoral votes.

At party headquarters in neighboring Costa Mesa, there were also few vital
signs. "The volunteers are all out," says Greg Haskin, the executive director of
the Republican Party of Orange County, surveying his small, silent office.
"Well," Haskin adds tentatively, "we are a little frustrated that the campaign
has yet to take shape. The issues of the race have not been defined yet. We're
still in a holding pattern. We're ready to go, of course. Rarin' to go, in fact.
But until we get our marching orders, there's little we can do. Where are our
marching orders?"

AT TIPPY'S charcoal Haven, a 1950's-style, neon-studded fast-food joint on the
main drag in Jersey City, two men who declare themselves Reagan Democrats are
talking politics. Frank Sclafani, who worked until recently in the shipping
division of Colgate-Palmolive, and Frank Giordano, a burly, semiretired
hairdresser with a weight lifter's physique, both voted Republican in 1988, as
they did in 1980 and 1984. It is bad news for George Bush that neither intends
to do so this year. Like most voters in New Jersey and throughout the Northeast,
they were never really taken with Ross Perot. "He didn't make that much money
being a saint," says Giordano, a Tippy's regular. Sclafani agrees. "Perot's a
fraud. But Bush is despicable.

"Bush let Hitler stay on in power," Sclafani says, a less than oblique reference
to the President's failure to oust Saddam Hussein from Iraq during the gulf war.
Sclafani's son, who graduated from West Point in 1990, served in Saudi Arabia
and only recently returned. "I don't understand why George Bush always seems to
run away from strength," Sclafani goes on. "For a guy who crashed in the Pacific
in combat and survived, he's got no sense of manifest destiny."

New Jersey, the quintessential suburban state with the third-highest per capita
income in America, should be solidly pro-Bush. In the last Presidential
election, the President got 56.2 percent of the vote. Since World War II, New
Jersey voters have supported a Democrat for the White House only twice.

"The most notable feature of political life in New Jersey in the past decade has
been the growth in the Republican Party," concludes Alan Rosenthal, director of
the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University. Yet New Jersey's 7.7
million people also tend to be fairly progressive, independent-minded ticket
splitters who elect Democrats to Capitol Hill and to the State House, as they
did three years ago -- to the regret of many -- with Gov. Jim Florio.

Polls and interviews in New Jersey suggest that in the Garden State, George Bush
is in trouble. "We've lost 289,000 jobs in the past three years -- almost half
of the job gains we made during the boom of the 80's," says Assemblyman Robert
D. Franks, the state party chairman. "Per capita income here, when adjusted for
inflation, shrank last year for the first time in almost a decade. Business and
personal bankruptcies have hit all-time highs. And our unemployment rate is now
9 percent -- more than a point above the national average." The latest Asbury
Park Press poll, last month, shows Clinton leading Bush, 50 to 25 percent.

"I voted for Bush as a continuation of the Ronald Reagan era," Sclafani
continues, sipping a mug of Tippy's coffee. "Reagan restored the dignity and
military strength our nation had lost in Vietnam. He wasn't afraid to call the
Soviet Union evil. Sure, he helped create some of the economic problems we have
today, but history will be kind to him. He and the Republicans got rid of
Communism."

Giordano recalls the days when most of the residents of predominantly white,
ethnic Jersey City were Democrats. "But most of us changed with Reagan in 1980,"
he says. "I'm not afraid to say I think family values are important to me, that
pornography disturbs me, yes it does. That crime in the streets bothers me.
Republicans talked about those issues. Democrats didn't."

But unlike Democratic Presidential candidates of the past, Sclafani and Giordano
agree, Bill Clinton is talking about these issues. And both men loved Clinton's
attack on the rap performer Sister Souljah, who after the Los Angeles riots
suggested rhetorically that those who commit black-on-black homicides every day
ought to devote a week to killing whites. Giordano says he's not surewhether he
will even vote this year. Like many Reagan Democrats in this state, he is
furious at Governor Florio, whose huge income tax increase three years ago
reinforced his fears about the "tax and spend" Democrats.

But Giordano's friend Sclafani is looking hard at Clinton -- one of a growing
number of Reagan Democrats around the country who might become Clinton
Republicans in November. William Schneider, a political analyst at the American
Enterprise Institute and CNN, says most polls and focus groups show that of all
Republican voters, Reagan Democrats are most likely to shift allegiance to
Clinton. Four years ago, about half of them did, in fact, abandon Bush for Gov.
Michael Dukakis. Schneider and many other campaign strategists say that it is
swing voters like Sclafani and Giordani who will decide the election.

CHARLES EDWARDS and his son Jason fix cars for a living in D'Lo, Miss., a tiny
speck on the state map that the main highway passed by a decade ago. "We keep
voting for change, but it's been so slow in comin' that we can't even see it,"
says Charles Edwards, 53, who voted for Bush in 1988. "I'm sure Bush is a good
man, but he's not in touch with mainstream America. We've got to shut down all
this overseas stuff. I don't want to leave any more debt to these children than
they already have."

Jason, 22, has been getting news of this year's political campaign from MTV,
which, he says, he watches regularly since there isn't much to do in D'Lo other
than "eat, drink beer and go into Jackson 30 miles away on weekends." Jason says
he is leaning to Clinton-Gore at this point, because "it's kind of appealing to
have two Southerners who might be a little more focused on us."

Some Republican strategists fear that the all-Southern Democratic ticket will
end the G.O.P.'s Presidential winning streak in Mississippi and other Deep South
states. But Clarke Reed, the head of Mississippi's Bush-Quayle re-election
campaign, disputes the pessimism. He insists that both Clinton and Gore are out
of sync with the bedrock values of the region. "They're both too slick to be
relating to the real Baptist culture here," Reed says. "Too yuppie to be fallin'
on their knees."

Reed also quarrels with the conventional wisdom that the Republican ticket will
be hurt in Mississippi by the state's sagging economy. The reason is a classic
case of diminished expectations. "Sure the economy is bad, but it's always bad,"
Reed says. For years, Mississippi has ranked at the bottom among all states in
income, literacy and health.

Mississippi may well rank first, however, when it comes to old-fashioned,
flag-waving patriotism. This state sent a higher percentage of young people to
the gulf war than nearly any other. "We love the Commander in Chief thing down
here," Reed says.

More than a dozen faded "Support Our Troops in Desert Storm" bumper stickers can
be seen in the parking lot of the Northpark Mall in Ridgeland, a white-flight
suburb of Jackson that has been solidly Republican for two decades. In the mall,
one finds that rarity in the political universe nowadays -- strong support for
George Bush. "I respect Bush because he let the military handle the gulf war and
didn't interfere,"' says 25-year-old Mary Frederick, who works in one of the
mall's jewelry stores. "And you just can't blame the economy on Bush. Congress
is to blame, too. They wouldn't let him do what he wanted to."

One of the few truly safe harbors for the much-buffeted Bush re-election ship
appears to be within the community of evangelical, or fundamentalist, Christian
churches in and around Jackson. Here, being a Republican is what many
parishioners call a "life-style decision."

"Family values is what motivates a lot of us," says the Rev. Stanley
Wachtstetter, the pastor of the Bible Tabernacle Church, in Clinton. It is with
this rubric that the Republicans, chiefly Vice President Quayle, have
effectively tapped into the evangelicals' staunch opposition to abortion, gay
rights and other tolerance issues. Among men and women alike in Mississippi,
being against abortion is next to godliness.

Wachtstetter says that rumors about Bill Clinton's drug experimentation and
marital conduct are "too flagrant, too blatant" for evangelicals to ignore.
"We're not really single-issue people," Wachtstetter says, "because family
values -- religion, child care, abortion, how we treat the elderly -- are not
single issues."

And yet while most of his parishioners share his views, not all share his
unstinting support for the President. "I'm gonna probably hold my nose and vote
for Bush," says Byron Duran, a carpenter who voted Republican in 1988. "As a
Christian, the Democratic platform is about as anti-God as you can get -- for
abortion, for gay rights. But our economy is in real trouble, and Bush always
seems to have economic plans for some other people somewhere else in the world."

Again and again, the churchgoers say they don't like the Clinton alternative
because the Democrats are "too liberal." But they also express a yearning for a
"real leader." Nathan Triplett, 22, says he wishes that Ronald Reagan were
running again. "He didn't compromise," he says. "I knew where he stood, and
nobody could beat him."

A PRESIDENT WHOSE core constituency base has been reduced to evangelicals is a
politician in trouble. And George Bush has only made matters worse by trying to
appease both the traditionalists and the right wing within his party. "Bush, a
moderate by nature, made a fundamental mistake in 1982 by trying to clone Ronald
Reagan," says Rita E. Hauser, a prominent New York Republican who supports
abortion rights. By tilting toward moderate-conservatives on some issues like
tenant management of public housing and, by political calculation, to the
radical right on others, most notably abortion, the President has wound up being
trusted by neither side.

If the fight over abortion within the G.O.P. has done nothing else, it has
energized the Republican center -- especially women -- a major segment of the
party that had been steadily losing influence for the last three decades. "At
some point, I realized that what was at stake here was my being comfortable
within my own party," says Hazel Gluck, the Republican consultant from New
Jersey. "When I was heckled at my own convention for supporting the Equal Rights
Amendment, I realized that things had gone too far."

Eileen E. Padberg, a Republican strategist 3,000 miles away in Irvine, Calif.,
voices similar feelings. "I'm a true-blue conservative and Republican," Padberg
says. "But increasingly I ask myself: What are those people doing in the party
of Abraham Lincoln, of individual freedom and privacy, of separation of church
and state? And what is George Bush doing on their side instead of ours?"

The answer may not reassure them. A series of New York Times/ CBS News polls
conducted in June and July show that while many Americans oppose Government
interference in the lives of individuals, a majority of Republicans and
Democrats alike believe that the Federal Government should help "uphold
traditional family values." In addition, only one-third of the Republicans
sampled say abortion should be "generally available," while some 60 percent
oppose using tax dollars to pay for it for poor women.

But the Padbergs of the party say they will not surrender, even if they lose
their fight to overturn the party platform endorsing constitutional restrictions
on abortion. They argue that their cause is just, not only on principle but on
political grounds. The flight to Perot among Republicans earlier this year, they
point out, tended to be heaviest in areas that were not only economically
depressed, but also dominated by the radical right. In New Jersey, where the
party is controlled by self-described moderates, a Perot groundswell never
materialized. But in Orange County, where Perot support was extremely strong,
ultraconservatives have long been in control. And in the Republican primary two
months ago, Padberg and other challengers to the entrenched right wing were
denounced by ultraconservatives as "lesbian spear chuckers."

Ann E. W. Stone, chairwoman of Republicans for Choice and one of the party's
most tenacious activists, says that in Washington State, where support for Perot
was also strong, the party has been virtually taken over by "zealots who have
passed resolutions calling for bans on pornography, witchcraft and yoga."

"We're going to take this party back to its roots," says Stone. "We're going to
stop the trend towards church fascism, the tail from wagging the dog. No matter
what happens to Bush-Quayle in November, this war will go on."

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Heather Isett, 19, just after registering as a Republican at
the Orange County, Calif., Fair: "I'm gonna vote for 'none of the above.' " The
Rev. Stanley Wachtstetter, arm raised, of Bible Tabernacle Church in Clinton,
Miss.: "Family values . . . motivates a lot of us." Dick Koolhaas, 67,
Dutch-born proprietor of a feed store in Perris, Calif.: Both political parties
are at fault for "the mess we're in." Cuban-born Luis Garcia, with his wife and
daughter, in North Bergen, N.J.: "The Democrats, all they do is tax and spend."
(pg. 18); President Bush working a partisan crowd at a community picnic in
Brookville, Ohio, last month. (pg. 20); Robert Woock, 75, of LaQuinta, Calif.:
"Republicans are wiser about managing the dollars." Jason Edwards, 22, mechanic
in D'Lo, Miss.: "It's kind of appealing to have two Southerners." Robert R.
Pyle, librarian of Northeast Harbor, Me.: "I feel like I'm turning against a
friend." (pg. 21); Letting it all sink in after President Bush's visit to
Brookville, Ohio, last month. (pg. 27)(Photographs by Edward Keating/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
A Deliberate, Unflinching Witness to History

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg;  Vicki Goldberg is the author of "The Power of
Photography: How Photographs Changed Our Lives."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1517 words


In September of 1990, when PBS broadcast Ken and Ric Burns's "Civil War,"
television taught its audience a new respect for still photography. The little
screen ingeniously deployed what were actually quite limited images of a
long-ago war. The emotional pull of those still photographs -- and they were
exceptionally still, for moving people, animals and trees registered as blurs --
was rather peculiar when you thought about it. Only five months later television
would provide a ringside seat at the Persian Gulf war while the battle was
raging, and most of the visual spectacle would be scarcely more memorable than a
game in a video arcade. The impact of the images obviously did not depend solely
on the state of the technology.

Civil War photographs, taken 25 years after photography was invented, made
history on several levels. One of the prime documents, Alexander Gardner's
"Photographic Sketch Book of the War," published in 1866, is on view at the
International Center of Photography (Fifth Avenue at 94th Street) through Sept.
6. Not the first war ever photographed, the Civil War was the first covered so
extensively. Wide distribution of small photographs and stereographs during the
conflict, as well as wood engravings after photographs in popular magazines,
began to change the general expectation of what might be seen of war and other
current events. From late 1862, when Gardner left Mathew Brady's employ and set
up his own studio, it was not Brady but Gardner and his assistants (including
Timothy O'Sullivan) who had the major responsibility for photographing the
conflict.

They depicted the horrors of warfare more deliberately and unflinchingly than
anyone had before. For the first time in America, and probably for the first
time anywhere in such numbers, death on the battlefield became visible to
civilians. Gardner at Antietam, then Gardner and O'Sullivan at Gettysburg,
photographed bloated and rigid corpses piled in ditches or haphazardly strewn
across fields -- images that put the lie to the age-old myth of glorious death
in battle.

It is not entirely clear how far-reaching the effects of the photographs were.
"Here are the dreadful details!" Gardner wrote. "Let them aid in preventing such
another calamity falling upon the nation." Not even pictures have that much
power; people who live by images still die by the sword. But it was already
understood in Gardner's day that photographs might influence opinions: in the
1850's, the English photographer Roger Fenton was sent to the Crimea expressly
to counter damaging newspaper reports about the military command. And in our own
time, the visual evidence from Vietnam, once it had convinced people that
official reports were lying, galvanized antiwar sentiment.

Gardner's text reveals a great deal about photography and the ease with which
words and context mold the interpretation of photographic facts. He remarked
that the camera was limited as a recording instrument, for pictures often
disclosed only a small portion of a scene's glory or devastation. In fact, that
frustrating limitation of photographs fuels their affective power: the frame
limits vision but opens the door to imagination. A viewer is free to believe the
armies were endless and the slaughter extended for miles, though neither may be
true. This has happened on television: Americans judged opposition to the
anti-Gorbachev coup to be much more widespread than it was because the
demonstrators so amply filled the screen.

In Gardner's day there was much more the camera did not, could not, do. It was
not yet fast enough to stop action. The frontispiece of the "Sketch Book" has a
drawing of an infantry engagement, but the photographs could only show men and
fields and ruins that stood still. In the gulf war the camera suffered a similar
handicap, once again almost unable to show action on the field. This time the
limits were imposed by military censors and governments -- ours and theirs --
rather than by technology. Jasem Behbehani, a Kuwaiti photographer whose work
was at the National Arts Club in June, buried his camera for fear of his life
during the Iraqi occupation, then dug it up at dawn the day Kuwait City was
liberated.

Technology is only efficient when efficiently employed. John J. Fialka points
out in "Hotel Warriors: Covering the Gulf War" that Civil War reporters sent
news of the Battle of Bull Run to New York in 24 hours by the up-to-date means
of telegraphy, whereas one news photographer's film from the gulf war took 36
days to get to home base via a military courier system known as the "pony
express."

Alexander Gardner believed that photographs provided a new kind of witness.
"Verbal representations of such places, or scenes," he wrote, "may or may not
have the merit of accuracy; but photographic presentments of them will be
accepted by posterity with an undoubting faith." No one put more clearly the
shift toward a reliance on the image that has characterized the century and a
half since the introduction of photography.

The camera offered the 19th century a new semblance of reality, and
photographers strove to sharpen it further. Stereographs yielded a vivid sense
of three dimensions, and Gardner even hand-colored some stereos of corpses,
making the images yet more intense. (The I.C.P. also shows his stereographs of
the West mounted on spindles in old-fashioned viewing boxes. The spectator turns
a handle and the deep space of the plains flips by like some magical version of
a travel book or some halting, stuttering attempt at a documentary film.)

For all his emphasis on the truth of photographs, Gardner was more than willing
to slant both facts and their interpretation. It is well known by now that he
moved a soldier's body some distance into a covert, placed a musket beside the
corpse and called the image "Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter." For over a century,
posterity accepted the picture with the "undoubting faith" he had predicted.
Presumably standards of accuracy were different in Gardner's day, and
truthfulness was as much a question of showing people how war could look as of
reproducing what chance put in the lens's way.

Describing two stark images by Timothy O'Sullivan of the same group of bodies,
Gardner refers to the savage deaths of the rebels in one photograph and the calm
resignation of the Union troops in the other. In fact, as William F. Stapp's
essay in the show's catalogue makes clear, Gardner's text repeatedly links and
interprets the pictures to drive home a moral about a righteous cause and the
just punishment of the treacherous South. Text and photographs are so carefully,
consciously integrated to convey a message that Stapp considers the "Sketch
Book" the first modern photo-essay.

Though it can be argued that photojournalism began with Civil War photography,
Brooks Johnson, curator of photography at the Chrysler Museum (which organized
this show), reserves that honor for a more compact episode of news as it
happened, the hanging of the Lincoln conspirators. When Harper's Weekly
published engravings after these photographs, several hundred thousand people
"saw" the hangings, many more than could have seen the actual event -- which is
practically a definition of modern visual communications. (The woman whose house
the conspiracy was hatched in was hanged with the others, despite objections,
but when portraits of the condemned were taken, delicacy prevailed, and only her
house was pictured.) It is grimly significant that whether the war or the
hangings take pride of place at the inception of photojournalism, the subject
matter was death.

Gardner was skilled at recording that, and he was called on to photograph the
hanging of Henry Wirz, commandant of the notorious Confederate prison at
Andersonville. (The idea that executions should be carefully documented caught
on quickly. After the Emperor Maximilian was shot in Mexico in 1867, Manet
consulted the photographic record for his painting of the execution.) Gardner
also photographed John Wilkes Booth's and Wirz's bodies at the post-mortem
examinations. Long before John F. Kennedy's assassination, official photographs
were being made of the autopsies of newsworthy figures. In Booth's case, only
one negative and one print were allowed to be made, and after they were turned
over to a military official, they were never seen or mentioned again.

As Gardner's "Sketch Book" proves yet once more, photography has a curious way
of preserving the past while magnifying the passage of time and the fragility of
the present. Knowledge of the Civil War has been preserved in good part by
photographs that don't quite show it because it went by too fast. Barely a year
after Lee surrendered, Gardner wrote that time, repairs and harvests were
already erasing the evidence at some sites that men had fought and died on the
landscape before his lens. While the camera stops time it simultaneously records
its passing, for everyone knows that the grass keeps growing and the stream
keeps flowing long after they are fixed on a little piece of

paper.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The hanging of the Lincoln assassination conspirators on July 7,
1865, as photographed by Alexander Gardner -- It has been argued that
photojournalism began here. (Chrysler Museum)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sampling the Flavors of Southeast Asia

BYLINE: By NANCY HARMON JENKINS;  NANCY HARMON JENKINS is working on a book
about ethnic American food.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 14; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2112 words


SAN FRANCISCO's reputation as one of the most Asian of American cities goes back
to the middle of the 19th century, when the first Chinese immigrants arrived
after gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill. Like other immigrants, those
earliest settlers brought their cuisine and their foodstuffs with them, and San
Francisco became known early on as a good place to eat Chinese.

Today, with what are some of the classiest Chinese restaurants anywhere east of
Taipei, the city is still a good place to eat Chinese. But adventurous diners
looking for new tastes and experiences may want to investigate a humbler food
scene in the little mom-and-pop and storefront eating places that have grown up
with more recent immigration from Southeast Asia, especially Vietnam and
Cambodia.

Although immigration from that part of the world, especially Vietnam, continues
to be significant (in 1990 alone, the last year for which statistics are
available, there were nearly 50,000 Vietnamese immigrants to the United States,
many of them settling in the Bay Area), the food of the region has been slow to
take root in this country. Inexplicably so, because it's a delightful cuisine,
fresh and flavorful, a tempting combination of crisp raw vegetables, lots of
seafood, pungent sauces and sharp chili peppers.

San Francisco is exceptional in having several easily accessible clusters of
Southeast Asian food shops and restaurants where visitors can spend a couple of
hours strolling, smelling, tasting, maybe sampling the cuisine at several
different eating places and then stocking up on Southeast Asian ingredients to
take home. And if you want just to relax and enjoy first-rate Vietnamese cooking
in a more formal environment, San Francisco can supply that too; Aux Delices, a
white-tablecloth restaurant on Polk Street, recalls the stylish
French-Vietnamese establishments that once defined elegant dining in Saigon.

Southeast Asian cooking generally is a close cousin to Chinese, especially in
technique, but it's leaner, not so rich, and the variety of fresh herbs and raw
vegetables -- mint, basil, coriander, cucumber, lettuce, grated raw carrot --
are seldom found in Chinese preparations. Vietnamese, Cambodians and Thais alike
use hot chili peppers and lemon grass, curry, coconut milk and tamarind,
combining these flavors to produce subtle, intricate, well-balanced tastes. The
use of chili peppers is instructive: Thai food can pack an aggressive punch, but
Cambodian and Vietnamese cooks are apt to use chilies as a fragrant condiment
rather than as an assertive statement on their own. Each of these cuisines --
Cambodian, Vietnamese, Thai (and also Laotian and Burmese) -- represents a
regional dialect of a single Southeast Asian culinary grammar, in the same way
that Tuscan and Sicilian are regional variations of Italian cuisine.

If rice is the staple food of the region, fermented fish sauce is the ubiquitous
seasoning. Nuoc mam, to call it by its Vietnamese name (it's tuk trey in
Cambodia), has an undeservedly evil reputation, too fishy for Western palates.
Made from anchovies and other small fish, layered in salt and left to ferment in
barrels, properly made nuoc mam is a clear, dark amber liquid, the color of an
oloroso sherry, with an unforgettable rich aroma (think of a well-aged Pont
l'Eveque cheese) and the robust, mouth-filling chewiness of a great wine. When
used as a sauce, nuoc mam is often cut with lime juice or sweetened water. It
may take a little getting used to, but it is well worth the effort.

What to drink with spicy Southeast Asian food is a problem that most diners seem
to solve with either cold beer or hot tea. Wine drinkers may want to explore
white wines, especially Gewurtztraminers, which, experts agree, can be a good
choice with these complex flavors.

THE area of Larkin Street north of Eddy, with its hot tub spas and massage
parlors, is unprepossessing to say the least, but it's one of the best places to
look for the casual, marketplace style of dining that's a hallmark of Southeast
Asian eating. There are no street markets here, but the simple savory fare of
restaurants in this seedy district calls to mind the kind of food you get in
market stalls all over Vietnam and Cambodia. While I wouldn't recommend a
nighttime visit (not because of danger so much as sleaze), by day the area is
full of interest and relatively safe (that is, lock your car and keep your
handbag closed and close).

You might start with the barnlike soup-parlor and restaurant called Pho 54 at
730 Larkin, (415) 928-8989. Pho is a type of noodle soup often served for
breakfast in Vietnam, where the culinary repertory includes an apparently
infinite variety of robust and filling phos all made in much the same way: rich
and flavorful meat stocks are served with more meat or fish, along with noodles
or rice and a variety of fragrant herbs and raw or pickled vegetables.

Pho 54's extensive menu includes some 20 soups, priced from $3.50 to $4.95.
Diners are presented with a deep bowl of cooked noodles and soup meat --
chicken, beef or pork, sometimes shellfish -- then select whatever appeals from
among sprigs of fresh mint, coriander and Vietnamese basil, sliced green chilies
and white onions, bean sprouts, slivered carrots and other raw vegetables
presented on a platter of garnishes. When the selection is made and the
ingredients assembled, steaming hot broth is poured over the bowl, slightly
cooking the raw herbs and vegetables and releasing their aromas. At Pho 54, we
tried big bowls of tai nam (tai gau, we were told, was "the same but more fat")
for $3.75. Along with ample shreds of the beef brisket that had gone into the
stock there were paper-thin slices of raw steak that also cooked briefly in the
hot broth; it was a luscious dish, complex yet clean-tasting. Bottles of nuoc
mam and tuong, a fiercely hot red chili and garlic paste, are placed on the
oilcloth-covered table for those who wish to adjust the seasonings.

English is not widely spoken at Pho 54, but hunting and pointing produce
excellent results. I wouldn't bother with anything other than soup as the menu
is too lengthy to inspire much confidence, but the soups are first-rate.

Down the street from Pho 54 is Angkor Cafe at 637 Larkin, (415) 775-1318, a
Cambodian noodle shop with plain, cheerful decor, distinguished primarily by the
vivid pink Formica tabletops, and time-warping music like Bob Dylan singing
"Lay, Lady, Lay." Rice noodles come in two varieties, thin or wide (Asians, I'm
told, will debate endlessly over whether wide or narrow is more appropriate to a
specific sauce), and there are also egg noodles, called mii. All come steamed
with a choice of topping: beef; meatballs; a mix of flank, tongue, tripe and
brisket; beef flank, both fresh-cooked and raw, with satay sauce; shredded
chicken, or a mixture of prawns, pork sausage, crab surimi and squid. Egg
noodles can also be ordered with a meaty chunk of savory braised duck leg and
are at their best pan-fried. Sweetly smoky lott chharr are special rice noodles,
short and stubby, lightly stir-fried with crisp bean sprouts, scallions and
green coriander and topped with a fried egg to make a robust, Asian-style
breakfast at $3.25. All the main course dishes range between $3.25 and $3.95,
while occasional daily specials go a little higher. Portions are ample and the
atmosphere is lively and friendly.

A stroll through Thang Xuong Market, at 724 Larkin (near Pho 54) can be
instructive for those who are curious about the varieties of sauces, produce and
rice-noodle preparations. If the market is not too crowded (avoid Saturday
afternoons), the clerks and proprietors are cheerful and quick to explain how
things are used and what they're made of. You may end up with a couple of
bottles of nuoc mam (which connoisseurs collect to sample just like olive oil)
or some fiery tuong to take home and add to scrambled eggs.

Near the corner of Eddy and Larkin, at 560 Larkin Street, is a tiny closet of a
shop called Sai-gon Vietnamese Sandwiches, (415) 474-5698, where for $2 you can
buy a delicious barbecued chicken sandwich, freshly made (the counter clerk
slices the chicken before your eyes) on a crisp baguette roll with coriander,
mint and strips of lightly pickled vegetables. The same carefully prepared
combination, but with spicy, peppery, pork meat balls replacing the chicken,
costs $1.50. This is fine picnic fare, to which you can add a couple of banana
leaf-wrapped packets of savory minced pork mixed with sticky rice.

Another area of interest if you're looking for Southeast Asian food is in the
Richmond district, heading west on Clement Street around Fifth, Sixth and
Seventh Avenues. Here, old favorite restaurants like Mai Viet-Nam, 316 Clement,
(415) 221-3046, and the Golden Turtle, 308 Fifth Avenue, (415) 221-5285, serve
such Vietnamese menu staples as cha gio, delectably crunchy spring rolls of
minced pork and shrimp wrapped in rice papers and deep-fried until crisp and
lightly brown, and nem nuong, charcoal grilled meatballs wrapped at the table in
rice papers and dipped in a savory peanut sauce. At both restaurants, complete
meals, not including beer or wine, run from about $7 to $11 a person.

Clay pot cookery, braising over high heat in a covered terra-cotta container, is
not unique to Southeast Asia (indeed, it's practiced all over the world wherever
ovens are rare) but the Vietnamese seem to have a special gift for it. At Minh's
Garden, a long, narrow hole-in-the-wall at 208 Clement, (415) 751-8211, pork
chunks and meaty prawns are braised together in a clay pot to make a rich and
flavorful stew. And if catfish baked in a clay pot is on the menu ($5.95), don't
pass it up, for the syrupy, peppery sauce makes a perfect foil for the bland
flavor of catfish. A complete dinner for two, not counting beer or wine, is
about $15.

DON'T be put off by the decor of Minh's Garden, which consists of illuminated
beer signs, credit card advertisements, fading posters of Asian landscapes, and
fake hanging plants. Despite the plastic plates on which it is served, the food
here is fresh and flavorful. Minh's cha gio, practically the Vietnamese national
dish, are notable, served (as they should be but aren't always) on a platter
with lettuce leaves and sprigs of mint or coriander, julienne strips of carrot
and a little mound of rice noodles. Barbecued pork spareribs are not a
traditional Vietnamese dish, but they've been adopted with enthusiasm and the
soy and sugar marinade gives them a decidedly Southeast Asian flavor.

One of the largest Southeast Asian food shops anywhere is the Richmond New May
Wah Supermarket on Clement between Sixth and Seventh, where you can find freshly
made rice pasta, along with herbs and seasonings like lemongrass, young pink
sprouting ginger and fresh galangale, the ginger-like rhizome that flavors many
Southeast Asian dishes, Chinese garlic chives, both fresh green ones and yellow
blanched ones, the tender shoots of young pea vines, dozens of varieties of
dried and pickled fish, and the fat, foil-wrapped packets of Thai and Vietnamese
pates, ready to take home and steam for supper.

At Aux Delices, 2327 Polk Street (between Green and Union),(415) 928-4977, the
atmosphere is very different from the casual neighborhood eating places. With
its white walls, pink place settings and blond wood furnishings, the place has a
calm, cool and soothing atmosphere, very different from the animation of the
neighborhood places. Prices are higher here, but it's still in the moderate
range, with most entrees priced between $5.95 and $7.95. Quality is high.
Witness the tom rang shrimp, quickly sauteed in the shell with a little garlic.

What would be called appetizers or finger food in other parts of the world are
an integral part of Vietnamese meals. At Aux Delices, try goi cuon, minced pork
and shrimp rolled up in rice paper to look like thick pale-white cigars and
served cold to dip in a chili-spiced bean sauce; or chao tom, savory minced
shrimp pressed around a stick of peeled sugar cane and grilled (nibble the
shrimp, suck the sweet cane juices and try to keep them from dribbling down your
chin); or banh cuon, crumbled pork, mushroom, onion and spices, wrapped in rice
paper and garnished with crisply browned onions, or chicken marinated in
five-spice powder and simply roasted to be eaten with the fingers. These
appetizers range in price from $4.50 to $7.50.

With the exception of Aux Delices and the Golden Turtle, reservations are not
necessary, but diners should telephone to be sure an establishment is open. They
open and close on a casual basis.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A bowl of beef and noodle soup at Pho 54, left, and the kitchen
at the Angkor Cafe, a Cambodian noodle shop. (pg. 14); Aux Delices, a
French-Vietnamese restaurant. The Richmond New May Wah Supermarket. (pg.
16)(Photographs by Terrence McCarthy for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q and A

BYLINE: By Carl Sommers

SECTION: Section 5; Page 4; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words



Bangkok to Angkor Wat

Q. We will be in Thailand in January and would like to visit Angkor Wat in
Cambodia while there. Are there any tours? -- Walt Cannon, Sarasota, Fla.

A. Here are some tour companies that can arrange visits to Angkor Wat from
Bangkok. Trips involve flying from Bangkok to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, staying
there overnight and then flying from Phnom Penh to Siemreap, near Angkor Wat.
The return trip includes another overnight stay in Phnom Penh. Those making such
a visit will have to send personalinformation (a photocopy of the first two
pages of a passport is often useful) and photographs to the tour company in
order to get a visa to Cambodia. All prices are based on two people sharing a
hotel room.

Diethelm Travel, 140/1 Wireless Road, Bangkok 10330, Thailand; telephone (66 2)
255-9150, fax (66 2) 256-0248. Diethelm runs tours to Angkor Wat out of Bangkok
daily except for Monday. The most popular is a four-day, three-night tour, with
two nights in Phnom Penh and one night in Siemreap. The cost is $1,215 a person,
including air travel, visa fees, hotels and meals. Combinations with Vietnam and
Laos are also possible. For example, a five-day trip out of Bangkok to
Vientiane, Laos, Phnom Penh and Angkor Wat is $1,305 a person until Oct. 31 and
$1,350 afterward.

Adventures in Paradise, 155 West 68th Street, Suite 525, New York, N.Y. 10023;
(800) 736-8187 or (212) 595-5782. The company runs four programs, from three to
eight days, that go from Bangkok to Cambodia -- with Angkor Wat the chief
attraction -- as well as a number of tours that also include Vietnam or Laos or
both. The three-day trip includes two nights in Phnom Penh and a day trip to
Angkor Wat; the cost is $1,230 a person, including air fare, visa fees, hotel
and meals. Longer trips feature two, three or four days at Angkor Wat and cost
$2,020 to $2,670. The company's Bangkok office is at 10/10 Soi 5, Phaholythin
Road, telephone (6 62) 279-2153, fax (6 62) 271-3818.

Wings of the World, 653 Mount Pleasant Road, Toronto, Ontario M4S 2N2, Canada;
(416) 482-1223. The company advises spending three nights near the temple and
two nights in Phnom Penh. This five-night package would cost about $1,800 a
person, including flights, hotels and visa fees but not meals. The company also
organizes tours to Laos and Vietnam and says that there is often less delay at
the Cambodian border if someone enters from one of those countries rather than
from Thailand.

Finding a Mask of Keats

Q. A college professor of mine once exhibited the death mask of John Keats,
which he said he obtained on a trip to England. Where can one be found? --
Steven G. Nester, Newark

A. The mask might have come from the National Portrait Gallery in London, which
until two years ago sold plaster copies of a death mask of the poet, who died in
1821 at the age of 25. The manager of the museum's shop, Sarah MacDougall, said
it stopped selling the masks because they broke easily. She said museum
officials expected to resume sales of the masks once they arrived at a suitable
and more durable material, but she could not say how soon. Those who write to
her, in care of National Portrait Gallery Bookshop, St. Martin's Place, London
WC2H 0HE, England, will get an acknowledgement, she said, and will be notified
once the masks are again on sale.

There are plaster copies of a life mask of Keats for sale at Keats House, where
the poet lived from 1818 to 1820, in Hampstead, about three miles northeast of
London. The mask was made by Patrick McDowell in 1828, when the poet was 21. It
costs £10.75 (about $21.50) or £17.95 ($35.90) with a base. The masks are on
sale at Keats House or by mail: orders must include a check in sterling and
there is an additional £10 ($20) fee for shipping. The shop says that because
the masks are fragile, they are shipped at the purchaser's risk (though they are
very carefully packed, they say). The shop sells a variety of Keats-related
souvenirs, including busts, books and cards. For a list or to order: Keats
House, Keats Grove, Hampstead, NW3 2RR, England; (071) 435-2062.

New Year's in Vienna

Q. How can I attend the New Year's Eve celebration at the Opera House in Vienna?
-- Peter M. Douglas, Skillman, N.J.

A. There should be tickets available for New Year's Eve events in Vienna,
according to the Austrian National Tourist Office, but you should order as soon
as possible.

On New Year's Eve the Imperial Ball (Kaiserball) takes place at the Hofburg.
Entry is about $130 a person, and a table reservation is an additional $150, not
including dinner. Tickets, which should be ordered as early as possible, can be
obtained from Kongresszentrum Hofburg, Post Office Box 113, A-1014, Vienna,
Austria, telephone (43 1) 587 36660, fax (43 1) 535 6426.

Also that night are performances of "Die Fledermaus" at both the State Opera
(seats are $9 to $150) and the Folk Opera ($5 to $60). To get tickets for
either, contact Osterreichischer Bundestheaterverband, 3 Hanuschgasse, A-1010
Vienna, Austria, (43 1) 51444 2959, fax (43 1) 51444 2969. There are also
performances on New Year's Day at both places.

Tickets to New Year's Eve performances by the Vienna Philharmonic at Musikverein
cost $8 to $75 and are available from Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Wien, 6
Karlsplatz, A-1010 Vienna, Austria, (43 1) 505 8681. The Philharmonic also
presents a New Year's Day concert; tickets for it are said to be nearly
impossible to get, though there may be some available at greatly inflated
scalper's prices.

On New Year's Eve and New Year's Day the Vienna Symphony performs at the
Konzerthaus. Tickets, $12 to $90, can be ordered from Wiener
Konzerthausgesellschaft, 20 Lothringerstrasse, A-1037 Vienna, Austria, (43 1)
712 46860, fax (43 1) 713 1709.

The Austrian National Tourist Office, 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110,
(212) 944-6880, will send a list of ticket agencies in Vienna that also sell
tickets for these events.

The 1994 Winter Games

Q. Could you furnish information on attending the 1994 Olympics in Norway? --
Helen Dean, Rowland, Pa.

A. According to the United States Olympic Committee, the Lillehammer Olympic
Organizing Committee has not yet named a ticket distributor for the United
States for the 1994 Winter Games. The distributor should be announced sometime
this fall, the United States committee said, and after that the distributor will
publicize the procedure for getting ticket information.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 19; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 969 words



ART THAT BITES

Twentieth-century artists who also served as political commentators and social
critics provide the material for a dual exhibition opening today at the Katonah
Museum. Carrying on the tradition of Goya and Daumier with gusto and pungency,
one section of the show contains 38 drawings, some never before shown, covering
issues, people and events from 1908 through last year.

It is called "In Good Conscience: The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American
Illustration," and it includes George Bellows's "Murder of Edith Cavell" (1918),
Reginald Marsh's "Bread Line" (1928), Paul Cadmus's "To the Lynching!" (1935),
and Ben Shahn's "Sacco and Vanzetti" (1952).

John Sloan, William Gropper and Sue Coe are among the other artists whose work
illustrates everything from reported German atrocities in World War I to the
stock market crash of 1929 to the civil rights struggle, the Vietnam War,
political assassinations, world hunger, homelessness and the AIDS crisis. The
curator for the segment was Bernard F. Reilly Jr., curator of prints and
photographs at the Library of Congress.

A second show is devoted to the lithographs, etchings, drawings and sketchbooks
of Alan E. Cober, titled "The Artist as Illustrator/The Illustrator as
Journalist." The retrospective spans 30 years and includes commissions executed
for Esquire, Harper's, Time, Rolling Stone, The Atlantic and The New York Times,
focusing on Mr. Cober's visual reportage of news, culture and the environment.
Steven Heller, a senior art director for The New York Times, was curator of the
Cober part of the exhibition.

Both shows will remain through Sept. 27, after which they will travel to
Dartmouth College in New Hampshire until mid-December, then to the Montgomery
Museum of Fine Arts in Alabama through late February.

The Katonah Museum is on Route 22 at Jay Street, off Exit 6 of I-684, then east
on Route 35 and south on Route 22. Viewing hours are noon to 5 P.M. Tuesdays,
Thursdays, Fridays and Sundays; noon to 8 P.M. Wednesdays, and 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Saturdays. Admission is free. Call 232-9555 for more information.

FISHING, ANYONE?

A family fishing expedition will be conducted by the County Parks Department
today at 2 P.M. in Playland Lake. The lake, made by damming a former bay, takes
up 80 acres of the 90-acre Edith G. Read Sanctuary.

Ken Soltesz, curator at the sanctuary, will lead the group into knee-deep water
with a long seining net supported by about 10 people. The net is dipped into the
lake to pick up a variety of marine life, which may include jellyfish, shrimp,
small flounders, minnows, killifish, pipefish and sticklebacks.

The catch will be placed in buckets of water for observation before being
returned to the lake. In summer the tides bring in salt water and fish from Long
Island Sound; during the rest of the year fresh water prevails, fed by rain. At
its deepest point the lake measures 10 feet.

To reach the site without paying a parking fee, drive to the left of the
Playland toll booth, follow the parking lot past the roller coaster and watch
for the sanctuary sign on the right. The program will end around 3:30 P.M., and
participants should wear clothes and shoes that withstand getting wet.

Another seining session is scheduled on Sept. 19 in Croton Point Park beginning
at 7 P.M. and conducted by lantern light. Christopher Letts will be the leader.
There is no charge for either event. Call 593-2602 for more information.

SHOPS AND POPS

The site of the defunct Danbury Fair still draws people from several states. But
instead of admiring the livestock, rattling and rolling on the midway rides, and
slurping cotton candy, they shop, shop, shop at the Danbury Fair Mall, at the
dozens of shopping plazas around it, and at Stew Leonard's. Getting to Danbury
on I-684 from White Plains, then taking Connecticut Route 84 to the mall, is a
matter of about 33 miles and 40 minutes.

At 8 P.M. Saturday, a day of shopping might be completed with a pops concert
conducted by Skitch Henderson and featuring Judy Collins and the Ives Symphony
Orchestra. It will be performed at the Charles Ives Center for the Performing
Arts, on the Danbury campus of Western Connecticut State University, not far
from the mall. Reserved tent seats are $20 and $25; lawn seating is $12 in
advance, $15 at the gate. Call (203) 797-4490 for tickets.

The mall is anchored by Lord & Taylor, Macy's, Sears, G. Fox and J. C. Penney
and contains 210 specialty shops, including Laura Ashley and Lerner's, and 20
restaurants. Stew Leonard's is a barnlike supermarket with 125,000 square feet
of fresh produce, meats, fish, its own dairy products, takeout dishes, imported
cheeses, groceries, flowers and an in-store bakery. Outdoors there is a petting
zoo; indoors, animated figures of singing cows, farmers and country musicians
stand atop the food cases. Prices are lower than average because of volume sales
and spot purchasing.

ART OF A SORT

A promotional campaign at a Scarsdale shop is producing a bizarre display of
"art," if one accepts the premise that anything that is framed is art. Now being
framed is an airplane wing from World War II. To create a window display of
travel mementos called "Souvenirs From the States" or "The Great American
Frame-Up," the Scarsdale Art and Frame Shop is seeking items from all 50 states
to be framed at a 20 percent discount, then displayed.

Marilyn Bloom, the owner, says, "Anything can be framed." So far her workshop
has framed a Pony Express saddle bag, autographs of some of the signers of the
Declaration of Independence, boat gear, Navajo rugs, sand paintings, and,
assembled as a collage, a Colt 45, holster, sheriff's badge and photograph of a
sheriff. The shop is near the railroad station and the phone number is 725-1066.


LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Mounted Policemen vs. Protestors" by James H. Daugherty, from
"In Good Conscience: The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American
Illustration" at Katonah.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Harry Truman's Reputation

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


To the Editor:

Your reviewer notes that readers of David McCullough's biography of Harry Truman
"will not . . . find much engagement in the debates over such highly charged
questions as the decision to use atomic bombs on Japan, the origins of the cold
war, the motives for the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950 and
Truman's policy in Vietnam." In short, this book seems to neglect the things
Truman did that affected our country the most.

Consider the cold war. The Soviet Union and the United States fought side by
side to overcome the evil of Nazism. Before the war was over, Truman had
established the cold war by instructing our military leaders to prepare for war
with the Soviets. They did -- by remilitarizing, initiating huge nuclear weapons
programs and even enlisting Nazis to help in the forthcoming war against
Communism (now revealed as no threat to world domination). The result:
trillion-dollar military expenditures that, in 40 years, have made the United
States a second-rate nation.

By dropping two nuclear weapons on cities, killing more women and children in
less time than anyone else in history, Harry Truman destroyed the conscience of
our country. Historians are now concluding that those bombs were dropped for
political reasons (to keep the real "enemy" -- the Soviet Union -- out of the
Japanese peace conference). Where is the American conscience on this subject?
Answer: it was destroyed by those two bombs.

Has any other American President come close to destroying both the financial
base of his country and the conscience of his nation? This is a man who is
considered a "great" President. So what are our historians and biographers
doing? Writing books on what a nice man Truman was.

MILTON H. ARONSON
St. Petersburg Beach, Fla.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AUGUST 9-15;
U.N. Votes, but Serbs Keep 'Cleansing'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


THE West took its first tentative steps toward military intervention in Bosnia
and Herzegovina last week as the United Nations approved a resolution
authorizing the use of force to protect aid convoys.

But even as the United Nations was acting, Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina were
continuing their policy of ethnic cleansing, under which Muslim Slavs and Croats
are being driven from their homes in what was once an ethnically mixed country.

There was little enthusiasm in the war-ravaged region for the United Nations
resolution. Muslims said they needed arms to defend themselves, not food, while
Serbs warned the West that the Balkans could become another Vietnam. The
Pentagon was openly reluctant to take part in any operation, so it seemed
unclear whether the mission of opening land corridors to besieged Muslim cities
would even get off the ground. Aid officials tried to use the glare of
international publicity to prevent the expulsion of more than 20,000 Muslim
Slavs from northern Bosnia. For the moment, the strategy stalled what would have
been the largest single incident of ethnic cleansing. But no one was very
sanguine that the success would hold. A political settlement also seemed
unlikely anytime soon. On Friday, peace talks in Brussels were boycotted by
Serbian and Montenegran representatives.

The death, apparently from sniper fire, of an ABC News producer, David Kaplan,
and further visits by reporters and aid agencies to Serb detention centers may
bring more pressure for changes in the course of events.  About 1,000 prisoners
of war were exchanged in northeastern Coatia. Still, Red Cross officials said
they had visited only four of the 94 Serb camps the Bosnian government has said
are holding prisoners.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A freed Croatian, one of 1,000 prisoners of war exchanged by
Serbia and Croatia last week, is greeted in Nemetin, in northeastern Croatia.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
The Rich Get Richer, But Never the Same Way Twice

BYLINE: By SYLVIA NASAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


IN the late 1970's, during the Carter Presidency, the super-rich commanded a
smaller slice of America's wealth than at any time since the 1830's, when Alexis
de Tocqueville was struck by "the general equality of condition among the
people" in the fledgling democracy.

By the end of the 1980's, soon after Ronald Reagan left the White House, wealth
in this country had become more concentrated than at any time since the Roaring
Twenties. The share of net worth -- assets minus debts -- held by the top 1
percent of households jumped from below 20 percent in 1979 to more than 36
percent in 1989, acording to a new historical data series compiled by the
economic historians Claudia Goldin and Bradford De Long at Harvard University
and the economist Edward Wolff at New York University.

Counting wealth rather than income is a dauntingly imprecise task even in the
computer age. But the numbers are more than educated guesses. The researchers
tapped studies of probate records and estate tax filings for the distant past
and elaborate Federal Reserve surveys of consumer finances for recent decades.

By the 1990's, billionaires had became far more common, if not exactly
commonplace. There were only 21 in 1982 (one for every 11 million Americans). By
1991, despite recession, there were 71 -- one Bill Gates, Sam Walton or Ross
Perot for every 3.5 million ordinary folk.

If the pattern suggested by the data is accurate, the wealthy's share of the
total wealth expanded as much during the Reagan boom as it did in the 100 years
-- roughly 1830 to 1929 -- in which America transformed itself from an
egalitarian land of small farmers into the world's reigning industrial power.

Three Great Cycles

"Economists have conjectured that over the process of economic development the
distribution of wealth started out more equal, turned less equal and then got
more equal again as education became more widespread," said Professor Goldin.
"The 1980's contradict that."

As the United States has prospered over the past 200 years, the share of wealth
in the hands of truly rich -- families with mountains of assets to back up
rivers of income -- has swung both high and low. Three great bursts of
accumulation and at least three periods of growing equality stand out.

Each time the forces that led to greater or less concentration were different
and at no time did politicians excercise anything like perfect control,
notwithstanding redistributionist impulses on the part of the Democrats and
Republican eagerness to disclaim all responsibility for growing inequality.

The end of Jeffersonian democracy came slowly. In the beginning, the country
consisted mostly of small farmers, each owning a bit of land and different from
one another only in ability, skill and luck. Industrialization was initially a
slow process -- flour mills, cloth mills, iron smelters -- that served local
markets and created local fortunes.

The age of moguls, which began in the late 19th century and culminated in 1929
in a frenzy of euphoria about capitalism's future, saw not just the creation of
corporations, huge industries like oil, steel and meat-packing, and the birth of
the mass market, but the emergence of a stock exchange that enabled the owners
of capital to cash out. The growth of wages, meanwhile, was held down by a tidal
wave of immigration.

In some ways, the 1980's resembled the Gilded Age and the era of robber barons.
The wealthiest 1 percent reaped more than half of the $2.5 trillion rise in
total net worth in the period, according to Professor Wolff, in part by building
great empires in media, computers and financial services. The stock and bond
markets boomed.

But history had not, in fact, repeated itself. Government had played a much
bigger role in enriching the wealthy. The supply side tax cuts slashed the
highest tax bracket from 70 percent to 30 percent, the high interest rates that
accompanied the budget deficit and the Federal Reserve's determination to
restore the value of money all swelled the value of capital.

The biggest difference, it turns out, had more to do with what was happening at
the bottom than at the top. While the pay of corporate presidents soared to 160
times that of the average worker, union membership sank, and pay and
productivity, which had advanced handily in the early 20th century, stagnated.

In 1929, the Leveling Begins

Home ownership and participation in pension plans -- more great equalizers --
declined. Young families saw debt mount faster than the value of their assets
when house prices did not rise, except in a few hotspots like California and New
York.

"John D. Rockefeller was a nasty bastard, but he built the oil industry," said
Professor deLong. "It's the combination of rapidly rising wealth for the Forbes
400 and slow productivity growth for the average American that's worrisome."

In the 1930's, 1940's and during the balmy postwar years, wealth also got
dispersed in very different ways. The great leveling started with the 1929 stock
market crash and continued, with pauses, well into the 1970's. Black Monday,
bank panics and, most of all, the Great Depression destroyed fortunes. The New
Deal took from the monied and gave to the poor and middle class. Washington
collected more income and inheritance taxes. More important, the New Deal saved
the homes, farms and businesses of millions of ordinary Americans.

Less well known is that World War II squeezed wealth into the hands of the
working classes. With millions of men in uniform, wartime labor shortages pushed
up wages while price controls held down profits. What is more, the National War
Labor Board -- heeding F.D.R.'s directive to raise substandard wages -- tended
to approve raises for poorer workers while turning down raises for the better
paid. The rich, meantime, had nowhere to invest except in war bonds whose value
evaporated when the country inflated its way out of its huge wartime debt.

It was in the mid-1970s, after Vietnam, the oil crisis and a bad recession
shattered business confidence, that the wealthy's share hit a low point -- in no
small part because of a 1973-1975 stock market collapse that was worse than
1929-1933 when the inflation of the 1970's and the deflation of the 1930's are
taken into account.

"Prices doubled, but so did wages and home values," said Professor de Long, "but
holders of financial assets got hammered."

In between, the 1950's and 1960's was a golden age. The rich got richer but the
middle class did so even faster. The stock market boomed, but so did suburbia.
The middle class acquired houses, cars, appliances and college educations as
never before.

Two Impalas per Garage

"The wealth of the average American, many the children of successful immigrants,
went up a lot," said Professor Goldin. "Instead of no house, people lived in
Levittown," added Professor de Long. "Instead of an old '34 Ford, people had two
Chevy Impalas. A bunch more people joined pension plans."

Looking ahead, it's not clear whether there are forces now at work that would
repeat the American past and spread wealth and income more evenly again. A
pickup in productivity growth could boost the wages of lower paid workers and
let more join pension plans. On the other hand, the technological revolution
could easily keep holding down the pay of the young and less skilled.

But neither the moguls nor the multitudes are acting as if they expect much
change. The stock market, a barometer of the hopes of the well-heeled, continues
to dance near all-time highs. In stark contrast, consumer confidence, which
measures the expectations of wage earners, remains unusually depressed.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "How Wealthy the Wealthy: a History" shows percentage of the
national wealth held by the richest one percent of Americans from 1774 to 1989.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Finally, Vietnamization

BYLINE: By Kevin Cooney;  Kevin Cooney has covered Asian news for the past six
years and is currently the Bangkok bureau chief for Reuters.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 736 words



AFTER THE WAR WAS OVER
Hanoi and Saigon.
By Neil Sheehan.
131 pp. New York:
Random House. $17.

IN 1989 Neil Sheehan, a former correspondent in Vietnam for United Press
International and The New York Times, returned to the scenes of his youth, of
his generation's war and of the reportage that became his life's work. "After
the War Was Over" is the result of that journey. This political travelogue deals
with the question that occurs so easily to all who visit Vietnam now, but that
American leaders of the 1960's apparently could not begin to formulate: "Why in
the name of God had we bombed a country as poor as this?"

The poverty, exacerbated by American bombing and now partly maintained by the
postwar American economic embargo, is everywhere present in this work, from
rat-infested hotel rooms to a filthy Hanoi hospital where the life of a child
was lost for lack of an antibiotic readily available at American drugstores.

The Vietnamese Mr. Sheehan interviewed are presented as people as forgiving as
they were fierce. As examples of dedication to the common good, they are sharply
at odds with the current conception of "Communist" as a synonym for "corrupt."

The most interesting of them is Nguyen Van Linh, who in 1989 was the general
secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party. He is a man who survived 12 years
in a French prison, 30 years of war and a decade of political infighting to push
his country toward economic liberalization and away from the grayness imposed by
his Stalinist comrades.

Mr. Linh, whose Communism is based more on "Les Miserables" than on "Das
Kapital," achieved a degree of reform, he told Mr. Sheehan, by applying the
lessons learned in the jungle fighting Americans. "My comrades and I could not
afford to be subjective in our conclusions," he said. "Had we been subjective,
we would immediately have been crushed by reality. So I continued to think
according to that pattern when I shifted to peaceful restructuring." Mr. Sheehan
contrasts this with the illusions on which John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson
based their war policy, primarily the belief that Ho Chi Minh and his
associates, heirs to a thousand-year tradition of anti-Chinese nationalism, were
pawns of the Chinese.

"After the War Was Over" serves as an afterword to the author's Pulitzer
Prize-winning "Bright Shining Lie" and will probably be most appreciated by
readers of that book. Mr. Sheehan revisits the battlegrounds of the war and
finds them filled with optimistic people, along with the "American grass" that
the Vietnamese believe was deliberately seeded by the United States to provide a
combustible material for additional waves of napalm.

To his surprise, Mr. Sheehan discovers an absence of animosity toward the United
States. In a country now finally, truly undergoing Vietnamization, buildings are
kept in readiness for the return of American officials.

As a Hanoi doctor said of the 19th-century microscope still used at his
hospital, "After the War Was Over" helps us "see a little better than with our
eyes."



WAITING FOR THE RATS

"The Hotel Metropole . . . was 'le dernier salon ou l'on cause,' the last really
fashionable place in Hanoi," [Bernard] Fall had written of his Hanoi of the
1950's. . . . When I walked up the front steps . . . past Grecian columns of
peeling white paint, and pushed on the revolving door at the entrance, it turned
grudgingly. The explanation was not in the heaviness of the once-handsome door:
almost everything in Hanoi has been running down since 1939. The spindle on
which the revolving door turned was worn out. Decades of guests coming and
going, grinding grit underfoot, had also created dips in the marble of the
entrance steps and the floor of the lobby. We went up to the room assigned to us
on the third floor. It was large and held two old wooden beds with mosquito
netting. . . . Because I had stayed in rooms like it elsewhere in Asia during my
young reportorial years, I could almost see the rats, even though I knew they
probably would not come out until after dark. (An Australian friend stayed at
the [Metropole] with his son and daughter while we were in Hanoi. His son lost a
large part of a sock to the rats one night, and his daughter was afraid to get
out of bed to take a bath because the rats made so much noise gamboling about
the room.) -- From "After the War Was Over."

NAME: Neil Sheehan

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Neil Sheehan with Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap after interviewing him in
Hanoi in 1989. (From "After The War Was Over: Hanoi and Saigon")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Port Authority Helps Homeless Find an Exit

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1662 words


More than a decade after New York City started grappling with a surge in
homelessness, a program by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to
combine police enforcement with treatment has cleared out the authority's
midtown bus terminal and started to wear away the building's image as a grim
example of the link between bureaucratic failure and human pathos.

Only eight months after the program's start, social workers for Operation
Alternative have handled 6,000 referrals for mental illness, drug and alcohol
abuse and abject poverty.

They have also raised a tentative hope that the city's slow-moving bureaucracies
may finally have started sketching out answers that move beyond the sweeps and
crackdowns that typified early efforts, which were attacked as cruel and
ineffective.

Advocates for the homeless give the Port Authority's approach grudging praise
and complain only that the program should be better financed and integrated into
a citywide plan. They argue, and public transportation officials increasingly
agree, that long-term solutions will benefit both the homeless who live in
public transit areas and the passengers who use them.

The benefits for the 185,000 people who pass through the terminal each day are
clear. Once a nagging reminder of the city's social and economic ills, the
terminal no longer represents a grim gantlet for bus passengers dodging beggars,
drunks, thieves and destitute drug addicts. Hallways and corners that once were
littered with the crouched and covered forms of up to 400 or 500 homeless people
are now both empty and clean.

Officials with the Port Authority link that change to a sharp drop in crime. In
the program's first seven months, reports of robberies in the terminal dropped
by 39 percent compared with the same period last year. Reports of pickpockets
were down by 41 percent and of assaults, by nearly one-fourth.

"Eight months ago when I came here," said Capt. William G. Cafaro, who
supervises police operations at the Port Authority, "the big complaint was the
homeless. Now, it is smoking."

The police report a similar though less dramatic drop in crime in the vicinity.
In the Midtown South precinct that includes the Port Authority Bus Terminal,
robberies declined by more than 15 percent in the first four months of this year
compared with the same period last year. Grand larceny and assaults declined by
6.4 percent and 7.9 percent respectively.

When the police encounter someone who is homeless in the corridors, they tell
the person to move along but also ask if he or she wants treatment or shelter.
Many homeless people return to the streets, but some accept the offer and are
escorted to an office on the ground floor.

Finally, Options

There, social workers from the Manhattan Bowery Corporation and the Partnership
for the Homeless, working under a contract with the Port Authority, direct
homeless people to places to sleep, eat and recover from everything from heat
exhaustion to multiple addictions seven days a week. "What this program has
allowed us to do," said Janis M. Beitzer, the terminal's manager, "is to
separate out different cases. The tendency is really to lump everyone together."

Still, seen against a broader background, the Port Authority's project is like a
pea inside a bucket, a small glimpse of success in a deep well of failure. The
sidewalk along Ninth Avenue is crowded with people living in boxes and eking out
a bare existence. So are surrounding streets.

Summer is the slowest season for shelters. But most are full. A nearby Manhattan
Bowery Corporation shelter and one run in the Bronx by the Partnership for the
Homeless, which handle Port Authority referrals, are packed to capacity. Winter
will surely make matters worse.

And with unemployment up and Federal financing for social projects already cut
and facing further reductions, the problem continues to grow. Mary Brosnahan,
the executive director of the Coalition for the Homeless, says that her group,
which sets up regular food lines at various sites around the city, is feeding
twice as many people as it did just six months ago, even at the Port Authority.
At one food line in Harlem, there are now 50 children under 13 who depend on the
nightly meals. And because the demands on that group have expanded suddenly in
recent months, the meals have been cut back.

A Call for Compassion

Critics say that public programs that stress evicting the homeless from such
havens as bus terminals and train stations are the cruelest of all. "You
shouldn't get tough on the issue, you should get smart," said Norman Siegel, the
executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union and a longtime advocate
for the homeless. "The city needs to develop a comprehensive plan to finally,
once and for all, get beyond this terrible problem. We've been dealing with this
for 12 years, and I don't see the light at the end of the tunnel."

No comprehensive program is in place. Yet the Port Authority's effort is one
positive sign. "The Port Authority is one of the most progressive of the
groups," said Ms. Brosnahan. "We just want to push them to be more progressive."

Operation Alternative's roughly $500,000 budget is barely one-thirtieth of the
$15 million allocated to the Port Authority Bus Terminal police. And it
constitutes less than 1 percent of the Port Authority Bus Terminal's annual $54
million budget. Mr. Siegel called the budget "insufficient," and said the city
should commit at least $5 million toward a broad approach that would integrate
housing with job training and treatment.

Advocates for the homeless said last week that the two groups hired by the Port
Authority have been one factor in the program's success. They tended to
criticize an older program, initiated in 1991 by the Metropolitan Transit
Authority. Though that program, too, uses social workers to convince homeless
people to get help, advocates said the M.T.A.'s follow-through is insufficient.

"Maybe they cleared up their problem," Mr. Siegel said of M.T.A. directors'
claims that the number of homeless in the subways has dropped to about 700 to
1,000 from about 3,000 to 5,000 in the late 1980's. "But they dumped it onto the
rest of the city."

Convincing the Homeless

Bernard Cohen, director of the M.T.A.'s department of policy and planning,
defended the M.T.A. program and stressed that it, too, contains a treatment
component. During a tour of Grand Central Terminal with social workers last
week, he said, he was told about a man who had lived there for four years. The
social workers said they had just convinced the man to buy a ticket on
Metro-North to go to a treatment center outside the city.

"I said, 'How do you know he got on the train?' " said Mr. Cohen. "So we walked
over to the platform and, sure enough, he poked his head out and started
chatting."

Wendy Feuer, the M.T.A.'s director for transit and facility design and one of
the organizers of the program for the homeless, said she believed it was still
evolving. "We are getting more sophisticated at handling these things," she
said. But she pointed out that some people are harder to reach than others.
"It's as though it's the last six miles of a marathon, when you really have to
do hard work."

It took 10 years and a heart full of failure before Tony, 24, finally sought
help and stayed with it. Last March 16, on the second day of a cold snap that
covered Manhattan with a clear blue sky but left thermometers drifting between
17 degrees and a high that barely cleared the freezing mark, he wandered into
the Port Authority Terminal to ask for help.

"I knew I had to stop or die," said Tony, who asked that only his first name be
used to protect his family. He described a life of homelessness and drug abuse.
"It got to the point where someone would want to kill me, someone including the
police."

Shifting on a metal chair and recounting his years on the streets, Tony said his
troubles started at 13 when a cousin invited him to help sell heroin and cocaine
on the streets of Harlem. For three years, he took his pay in fancy clothes.
Then, on his 16th birthday, he got a shoe box stuffed with $16,000. He also got
a message: His cousin told him that from that day forward, Tony would be in
business for himself.

Within a year, the cousin was dead and Tony's life started unraveling. In quick
sequence he was shot, stabbed and attacked with a baseball bat. His drug use
increased; his luck ran out.

Several times he quit taking drugs. Always he went back. By March, he knew he
was near some personal end point, a moment when he had to change. He had heard
that the Port Authority's program worked.

Help for Some, Not All

Today, Tony still lives in a shelter run by the Manhattan Bowery Corporation.
But he is off drugs, is working on his high-school equivalency diploma and has a
paying job working every night with homeless people who, like him, wander in to
seek the program's help.

Not everyone wants it. Last week, as a driving rain pelted rush-hour commuters,
Mary Jane Manley and Lewis Terry sat on 41st Street, under the second-story link
between the terminal's two buildings and shared a cigarette. Ms. Manley was
drinking Thunderbird. Mr. Terry was sipping from a large bottle of beer inside a
paper bag.

They passed the cigarette back and forth and said they had heard about the
program. Mr. Terry said he did not go because he was a Vietnam veteran and would
go to a Veterans Administration hospital if he needed help. Ms. Manley fished
into a pocket for a letter of referral to the Port Authority's program.

"I want to go," she said. "I want to get myself back together again. Maybe this
weekend. Maybe I'll go in there this weekend." Then she excused herself and her
friend. They were busy drinking and talking. There were still a few drags in
their cigarette. Ms. Manley tucked her referral letter away again. The center,
she knew, would be open another day.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Officer C. E. Werfelman waking up a man in the Port Authority
Bus Terminal. The officer escorted him out after telling him of Operation
Alternative, in which the homeless are directed to shelters and treatment. (Budd
Williams for The New York Times) (A1); Since the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey and the police have combined forces with social workers for the
homeless at the Port Authority Bus Terminal, passengers, above (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times), no longer have to dodge beggars, drunks, thieves and
destitute drug addicts as they did less than a year ago, below. (Edward
Keating/The New York Times) (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Acting Police Boss: Turning Grand Visions Into Reality

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


If Raymond W. Kelly has a public image at all, it is the one that flashes from
time to time at those news conferences with the Mayor and the Police
Commissioner in front of a hospital or crime scene, always from just off to the
side. He stands with his hands held tightly in front of him, his shoulders
squared, his eyes unblinking, compact like a fighter ready to spring, but
somehow at ease in his corner.

In his background role, Mr. Kelly directed a department staffing analysis that
formed the basis for putting 5,000 new officers on patrol as part of Mayor David
N. Dinkins's Safe Streets, Safe City plan. When disturbances broke out in
Washington Heights last month, with the Commissioner away, it was Mr. Kelly who
drove himself street by street through the neighborhood where cars were burning
and angry crowds were hurling bottles at police officers.

Putting Theory Into Practice


Now, as he assumes the post of acting Police Commissioner and is considered a
candidate to succeed Lee P. Brown as the permanent Commissioner, Mr. Kelly will
also try to convey a notion of himself shared by many police and city officials:
that while Mr. Brown has been the thinker with the grand visions, Mr. Kelly, in
the shadows, has had his hands on the levers, putting theory into practice.

He must be tactful, he has said, because while he feels it is important to
define himself, he does not want to appear to be campaigning for the job. But in
an interview on Friday he offered an evolving self-portrait. "I'm an operator,"
he said. "Someone who has worked at every level in this department, done just
about every job. I think I know how the organization works. I like to think of
myself as an action person, perhaps less philosophical than Lee Brown, a doer
and user of what's out there in the organization."

Sitting in his office on the 14th floor at One Police Plaza -- in a separate
wing from the Commissioner's office that he will move into as acting boss on
Sept. 1 -- Mr. Kelly spoke in a tight voice that suggested he was still shy of
front-line politics. When an aide suggested to him that he was more than just an
"operator" -- that degrees from Manhattan College, Harvard University, New York
University Law School and St. John's University School of Law, and three years
in the Marines, distinguished him from the typical career police officer -- Mr.
Kelly's eyes opened wide as if he had finally been pointed to his proper public
persona.  "That's right," he said. "That's an interesting point."

When Mr. Brown suddenly resigned earlier this month, citing his wife's illness,
the decision presented Mr. Kelly, 50 years old, with a cherished opportunity but
also thrust him into the middle of a potentially volatile political issue. Mayor
Dinkins has said he expects a recommendation for a successor to Mr. Brown from
his five-member search committee by mid-September. The Mayor will feel pressure
to replace Mr. Brown, who is black and from Houston, with another black
commissioner as well as another outsider who would be guaranteed not to be
touched by the current investigation into charges of corruption in the
department.

But Mr. Kelly said he was unfazed by the various demands on the selection
process and was confident that the time was right for someone who "can make the
system work."

In many ways, he projected a view of the Police Department close to Mr. Brown's:
that whatever flaws it may have, its different parts need not an overhaul but a
shoring up. But unlike Mr. Brown, who has maintained optimism even through
tumultuous periods, Mr. Kelly spoke about the department and crime in a way, he
said, that reflects his thinking as a New Yorker.

"Crime is down and response time is down, and then you go on the street and see
that people still don't feel secure," he said. "So we have to realize that as we
sit in our ivory tower thinking we're doing a great job, the world still has a
lot of problems that the police can potentially impact on."

Some Shared Views

He shares Mr. Brown's views on a variety of issues that have troubled the
department. Like Mr. Brown, he opposes use of 9-millimeter semiautomatic guns by
officers, but said he would "ride out" the compromise with the Legislature under
which some officers will carry them. He opposes an all-civilian board to review
complaints of police misconduct and brutality, a plan opposed by Mr. Brown but
favored by the Mayor.

Mr. Brown provided the impetus for community policing, a program to put more
officers on foot patrol in neighborhoods and to place more emphasize on
problem-solving. Mr. Kelly said that if he were named to the Commissioner's post
permanently, his role would be to coordinate the many layers of the department
to make the concept a reality throughout the city. Specifically, he said, he
would use a hands-on approach to ease internal struggles that, while invisible
to the public, can impede the process of change in the department.

"There always a tension at times like this," he said. "The people responsible
for training for community policing want people off patrol so they can train
them, and the operators say you can't have them because we still have to police
the city."

It is the Commissioner's role, he said, to analyze the costs and benefits, pick
up the telephone and call the "right people" in the department.

He said he was close to completing one of his last assignments from Mr. Brown:
to investigate charges that the department's Internal Affairs Division had
suppressed or ignored evidence about Michael Dowd, one of six Brooklyn officers
arrested in May on charges of dealing drugs. He said he was leaning to the
conclusion that while the division did not need to be "ripped up," its
administrative techniques should be improved.

During the interview, Mr. Kelly spoke with his jacket off -- already a change
from the formality of Mr. Brown, who was never seen in his shirtsleeves in
public. And unlike Mr. Brown, who guarded his privacy, Mr. Kelly reminisced
about growing up in a building at Columbus Avenue and 91st Street in Manhattan
when the neighborhood was burdened with gangs. He recalled once fighting in the
street while a friend's mother, instead of trying to break up the fight, helped
form a circle of spectators around him. When he was 13, the family moved to
Sunnyside, Queens.

His description of his father, who was a milkman and later worked for the
Internal Revenue Service, might be used for him. "He was hard-working," Mr.
Kelly said. "He was a feisty guy, but I don't remember him doing physical labor.
There was just a physical sense about him."

While attending Manhattan College and working as a Macy's stock boy, he heard
about the police cadet program that enlisted college students to work in the
department. His first job, he said, was on the switchboard, taking emergency
calls. Since then, he has worked in almost every police assignment, from
undercover in the anti-crime unit to the youth aid division to public morals,
before becoming First Deputy Commissioner.

He said he knew that his three years as a marine in Vietnam, and even his very
appearance, with short-cropped haircut and rigid jaw, might give people the
impression of an inflexible military man. But he showed off a 30-year-old
photograph of himself in battle fatigues.

"If anything, I learned about compassion and valuing little things," he said. "I
remember having no food and developing kidney stones because we had no water. We
moved around aimlessly. People would step on mines. Someone would get shot. We'd
move and something else would happen. There was no glamour."

The trench-warfare demeanor, he said, had not left him. "A Commissioner," he
observed, "has to be many things, but it's what you do in the background that
matters."


LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The soon-to-become acting Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly,
said that he has "worked at every level" in the department. (Andrea Mohin/The
New York Times) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Crime and Ethnic Tensions Rise as Queens Neighbors Change

BYLINE: By MELINDA HENNEBERGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words


An angry drunk approached the park bench in Corona, Queens, where Pedro and
Aurea Lousa were treating some children to an Italian ice. He threw an empty
baby stroller against Mr. Lousa's knees, narrowly missing the infant asleep in
the 65-year-old bookkeeper's lap, and erupted in a loud racist rant.

Poking a finger in Mr. Lousa's face, he shouted, "Have some manners, do you
comprende?" Mr. Lousa quietly asked the man to "be nice," but the tirade went on
until the intruder's friends intervened.

"You see what we mean?" said Mrs. Lousa, 63. She and her husband, who moved to
Queens from Puerto Rico as teen-agers, had just explained why after 35 years
they were leaving their Corona home for Florida.

"It's changed too much," said Mrs. Lousa. "Before it was nice and quiet. You
could go outside anytime and nobody bothered you. Now it's fights everywhere."

String of Shocking Crimes

Last week two men, one of them a hostage, died in a shootout between the police
and robbery suspects outside an illegal social club two blocks from where they
were sitting. That incident followed a string of shocking crimes in Queens over
the last month, including the murder of a police officer's parents during a
push-in robbery in their Woodside apartment, the slaying of two Far Rockaway
community leaders who had befriended an ex-convict arrested in their deaths, and
the rape of a Laurelton woman who the police said was attacked by the same
serial rapist about a year ago.

And the unwelcome headlines have come when New York's murder rate is down for
the first time in 7 years, falling 11 percent in the most recent quarter from
the same period a year ago. In Queens, though, homicides increased by 4.9
percent.

Much of the borough is still quiet and well tended, the kind of place where
children can ride their bikes long past dusk. In fact, Teresa Chow says Corona
is far safer than the Bronx neighborhood she left six months ago. "Everywhere is
getting worse," shrugged Mrs. Chow, 27. "At least here my kids can play
outside."

But the crime surge is changing Queens's image as a livable refuge from the
problems that have long plagued other New York communities. Although the police
say they do not think race has played a role in any of the highly publicized
recent crimes, some residents in the areas affected by the spate of summer
violence link the recent problems to the volatile new ethnic mix in their
rapidly changing neighborhoods.

Corona has undergone sharp changes in recent years, as immigrants from Ecuador,
Colombia and the Dominican Republic have moved into the once mostly Italian
neighborhood.

In Laurelton, several longtime residents say news that a serial rapist is on the
loose is more evidence of upheaval in an area that has been almost wholly
transformed.

"My wife says every noise she hears she thinks the rapist is going to come
through the door," said James Woodley, a 34-year-old record producer who still
lives in the house his grandmother bought in 1963, when it was surrounded by
open fields. But he no longer knows all his neighbors, and cannot tell them from
outsiders.

When Mr. Woodley was a boy, Laurelton was populated by middle-class blacks,
Irish and Italians. "It wasn't 'Mayberry R.F.D.,' but it was a very comforting
environment," said Mr. Woodley, whose heritage is American Indian, black and
Portuguese. "I had no concept of racism. Everywhere you went it was, 'I know
your grandmother, son, and you better get home.' "

Today, most of Mr. Woodley's neighbors are either transplants from Brooklyn and
the Bronx, or recent immigrants from Haiti, Trinidad and Tobago, and Jamaica.
The former, he says, seem to have brought inner-city anxieties with them, while
the immigrants are sometimes divided by cultural differences difficult for
outsiders to understand.

New Borough Can Be Shock

Although the neighborhood was always racially mixed, "certain combinations open
certain doors," Mr. Woodley said with real sadness. "It's disappointing, because
it's not a real neighborly kind of vibe."

Even emigres from other boroughs can suffer culture shock, he said. "People
coming from the Bronx because Queens is grass and trees are escaping the
concrete jungle, but they come with the idea of fences and aggression."

Mr. Woodley never saw a gun as a child. Last year, his 9-year-old daughter
looked out the window of her school bus and saw a young man shot to death on her
block. Worse yet, he said, some "kids who had just moved from Brooklyn and the
Bronx thought it was no big deal."

Still, there are relatively few 'For Sale' signs posted in Laurelton, or any
other neighborhoods touched by the violence in the last month.

Milton Silverman, whose Far Rockaway neighbor, Marion Polichak, and her
companion, James Dwyer, were bludgeoned and stabbed to death last month, said
the fact that Ms. Polichak and Mr. Dwyer may have known their attackers
indicates the murders were an isolated incident.

"At first we were apprehensive, but we came to the conclusion that the murderers
were known," he said. An 87-year-old woman was also beaten to death in her Far
Rockaway home in an unrelated attack last month. But Mr. Silverman, a retired
insurance broker, said he and his wife, Rhoda, who moved to the area in 1958,
had no intention of leaving.

Mr. Silverman is not a fan of the changes in Far Rockaway, which was once mostly
Jewish and now has mainly black, Indian and Hispanic residents. "If we had the
magical ability to turn back the clock, I liked the 50's better," he said, "It
was more comfortable in those days." But, he said, "we're still here."

In Flushing, where a growing Asian population has converted the area into
another Chinatown, some longtime white, black and Hispanic residents say they
feel the neighborhood has been sold out from under them.

Tai Ma, a 40-year-old immigrant from Vietnam, said he was weary of "a lot of
these people that can argue with any reason, saying, 'You're blocking our way,'
or 'You're doing business to earn our money.' "

"We are peaceful people," Mr. Ma said, and people bringing desperately needed
new jobs, investment and opportunity to the community. "If the Oriental people
don't come in, the Arab people will," he said evenly, as he stood on the
sidewalk outside his shop, passing out small, sweet longan fruit to passersby.
"Somebody's got to rebuild the city."

Mr. Ma and his wife were boat people whose eldest child was born in a Malaysian
refugee camp in 1978. After arriving in New York in 1979, he worked days mixing
chemicals in a factory and nights as a hotel security guard. He lived with
relatives until he saved enough money to open the Double Quality Food Market on
Roosevelt Avenue in 1984.

To those who think change is stressful, Mr. Ma says: "They have nothing to
complain. In Vietnam we had to fight for everything."

Spring McClendon, a 34-year-old black woman who has also lived in the
neighborhood since 1984, has given a lot of thought to the cultural differences
that almost inevitably create misunderstandings.

Asians "are not used to space, so that's why people say they're rude and pushy"
when they stand too close, or fail to give way on a crowded street, said Ms.
McClendon, a supervisor at an insurance company on Wall Street.

"We have lived in a culture where the customer is always right, and they're a
class of shopkeepers," she said. "So we're not used to walking into a store and
having them say, 'What do you want?' We're used to having them say, 'Can I help
you?' and groveling."

Mrs. McClendon, who grew up in a predominantly white Connecticut community and
roomed with a South African girl at boarding school, is enthusiastic about
living in a mixed neighborhood. Her next-door neighbor, who is Korean, sometimes
drops by to practice English. But she is not immune to conflict.

On the subway one morning, "this Korean man said something about my being black
and I said, 'You sound like you just got here,' " Mrs. McClendon recalled.

She told the man, 'If all you have to contribute is racism, you need to go
back.' "

Of several dozen Queens residents interviewed last week, only a smiling
17-year-old who arrived in Flushing from Punjab State in India barely two months
ago seemed unaware of crime and contention in his neighborhood. Sumeer Jain said
his mother had phoned just that morning to report that 50 people in two villages
near Nawanshahr, his hometown, had been killed in ethnic clashes.

In his new community, Mr. Jain has found a job in a Baskin-Robbins, where
co-workers have given him a new name: Robin. And he has also apparently picked
up his new employer's fixation with numbers, noting with pride that he has made
22 new friends in Queens: Indian, white and black. "I don't believe in caste,"
he said, taking a bite of an apple. "I want to talk to everybody."


LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Woodley, Record producer living in Laurelton. Of growing
up in Laurelton, he said: "I had no concept of racism. Everywhere you went it
was, 'I know your grandmother, son, and you better get home. It wasn't 'Mayberry
R.F.D.,' but it was a very comforting environment' "; Tai Ma, Store owner on
Roosevelt Avenue. He is weary of "a lot of these people that can argue with any
reason, saying, 'You're blocking our way,' or 'You're doing business to earn our
money.' " (Photographs by Edward Keating/The New York Times); Milton Silverman,
Retired insurance broker living in Far Rockaway. "If we had the magical ability
to turn back the clock, I liked the 50's better; it was more comfortable in
those days." But, he said, "We're still here." (Rebecca Cooney for The New York
Times) (pg. B1); "Everywhere is getting worse," said Teresa Chow, who moved to
Corona, Queens, six months ago from the Bronx. She said Corona was far safer
than her old neighborhood: "At least here my kids can play outside." With Mrs.
Chow, from the left, were her children, Jessica, Fausto and Cindy. (Edward
Keating/The New York Times) (pg. B3)

Graph: "At a Glance: Crime in Queens And in the City" shows change from 1991 to
1992 in crimes reported during the first quarter in Queens and all of New York
City. (Source: Police Department) (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
On the Dirtiest Word in the Political Language

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words



The Democrats' Dilemma
Walter F. Mondale and the Liberal Legacy
By Steven M. Gillon
Illustrated. 468 pages. Columbia University Press. $34.95.

The L word -- liberalism, not love -- is at the center of the 1992 Presidential
campaign. The Republicans attack it; the Democrats avoid it. It's why the
Democratic Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates, playing their rhetoric
down the middle, have been called Democratic Republicans, anything but liberals.
Trying to pin the old liberal label on the Democratic donkey has confused the
Republican Republicans. It's clear that an aim of the Republican convention is
to make the phantom liberalism a continuing idea and dirty word.

Although "The Democrats' Dilemma" was completed before the Clinton-Gore campaign
strategy this summer, the L word is still visible in Steven M. Gillon's
challenging book, which is subtitled "Walter F. Mondale and the Liberal Legacy."
Mr. Gillon, an associate professor of history at Yale, is the author of
"Politics and Vision: The A.D.A. and American Liberalism, 1947-85." (A.D.A.
stands for Americans for Democratic Action.) His new book is a fairly objective,
not uncritical biography of former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, who was
defeated in his bid for the Presidency by the incumbent, Ronald Reagan, in 1984.
What recommends this well-researched book is not so much the biography but the
fact that it emerges as a study of the American political scene and electorate
in the last quarter-century.

"The Democrats' Dilemma" is filled with insights about running for President,
including some by Mr. Mondale himself. After his losing campaign, Mr. Mondale
told friends, "Reagan was promising them 'morning in America,' and I was
promising a root canal."

In a telling remark defining his differences with many older Democrats, Senator
Tim Wirth of Colorado said: "We were products of television, not of print. We
were products of computer politics, not courthouse politics. And we were
reflections of J. F. K. as President, not F. D. R."

The biography presents Mr. Mondale as a decent, sensitive public servant, well
qualified to be President and in the tradition of his mentor, former Vice
President Hubert H. Humphrey. As the Attorney General of Minnesota at the age of
32, Mr. Mondale converted a ceremonial office into a center of activism. During
his 12 years as a Senator, he initiated legislation for a fair-warning-standards
act, a fair-housing act and a filibuster-campaign-reform act. Mr. Gillon asserts
that Mr. Mondale was frustrated as Vice President and at one point thought of
resigning.

He also finds that Mr. Mondale had a faulty political vision and was unable to
adjust to the demands of a modern media age. He writes: "Mondale was a
transitional figure between two generations of Democrats.  On one side of the
divide stood those whose historical memory was rooted in the economic emergency
of the Depression and the tragedy of Munich. These liberals hoped to sustain the
New Deal coalition through appeals to economic self-interest and vigilant
anti-Communism. On the other side stood younger Democrats whose perceptions were
shaped by postwar affluence and the 'lessons of Vietnam.' "

The younger Democrats heading the ticket in 1992 are obviously aware of these
differences. In the years after 1968, the author notes, the problems confronting
the Democratic party transcended the limitations of any candidate, including Mr.
Mondale. The emergence of controversial social issues -- crime and the death
penalty, abortion, school prayer, gay rights and the rights of minorities --
eroded support for traditional Democratic appeals to economic self-interest.

Battle lines shifted in recent Presidential campaigns, but Mr. Mondale and later
Democratic candidates found themselves holding defensive positions. The
Republicans "successfully defined the debate over these issues as a clash
between the insurgent values of a liberal elite and the traditional values of
middle-class Americans," the author writes. "This new conservative populism has
replaced contempt for greedy businessmen with a disdain for liberal judges,
unresponsive bureaucrats and arrogant minorities."

At least since the time of President Lyndon B. Johnson, who was so effective in
pushing civil rights laws through Congress, no issue has been more explosive
than race. Through the use of code words and television symbols, the race card
was played by Vice President George Bush to help defeat Gov. Michael S. Dukakis
in the last election. The race issue has been stilled momentarily, but it is
doubtful that it has disappeared in the '92 campaign. On race, Mr. Gillon
provides historical perspective.

"As the national Democratic Party became identified with the civil rights
struggles, the white South as well as many urban ethnics in the Northeast and
Midwest moved comfortably into Republican hands," he writes. "Many of these
voters no longer viewed the Democratic party as a vehicle for advancing the
economic well-being of all Americans, but as a hostage of its black
constituents. The party's support for controversial policies such as affirmative
action and busing, the growing visibility of 'threatening' leaders such as Jesse
Jackson and fears about the emergence of a 'black underclass,' have fed old
racial stereotypes and further divided the races. Race is the prism through
which many of the new social issues are filtered."

The liberal legacy, which sustained Democrats in the Roosevelt, Truman, Kennedy
and Johnson Administrations until the Vietnam War divided the country, is now
undergoing a redefinition. Walter Mondale and the Democratic Party had to
struggle with a dilemma: how to keep the party's liberal traditions while
attracting conservative and independent voters. "Democrats must articulate a
single compelling vision," Mr. Gillon advises, "that energizes middle-class
America without abandoning the concerns of its marginalized constituencies."

That familiar notion is why the L word has been put on hold until Election Day,
and possibly afterward. If not as poetically, the Democratic script now seems to
follow the line in "The Second Coming" by Yeats: that unless the center holds,
things will fall apart, the ceremony of innocence will drown and the party will
go slouching toward the White House, its ideals in disarray.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Steven M. Gillon (Yale University)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

PARTY IN THE SPOTLIGHT;
After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 16


It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with
the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win
another Presidential election.

Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up
five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of
its members became the first President to resign. Until a few months ago,
Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats
might never win another Presidential election.

But as Republicans trooped into Houston this weekend to renominate George Bush,
there were signs that their glory days might be numbered. The building blocks of
their ascendancy, anti-Communism and social issues, no longer control the
agenda, and Mr. Bush and his strategists appear unsure about what they can do to
compensate.

Some Traditional Talismans

Politics is cyclical, especially Presidential politics. Thirty years in power
followed by thirty years in the wilderness is the usual formula, according to
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian, though it is seldom so exact. The
weakening of party loyalties may have somewhat truncated the pattern, and the
Republican string may be running out after only 25 years.

Republicans cling to traditional talismans. Modern incumbents do not lose unless
some cataclysmic event (the Depression, Watergate, the Iran hostage crisis)
disrupts their term. Candidates do not usually win on their first try for the
Presidency, nor do candidates from small states like Arkansas often manage to
prevail (not since Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire, anyway). And since the New
Hampshire primary was instituted, no one has been elected President who did not
first win that state's primary. Bill Clinton came in second.

But the brakes of history seem to be working against Mr. Bush and his party. The
Republicans seem to be losing momentum, the same way the New Deal/Fair Deal/New
Frontier/Great Society did after four victories by Franklin D. Roosevelt and one
each by Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

From Swords to Plowshares

The end of the cold war has robbed the President's party of one of its mightiest
swords. The nation came to see the containment of Communism as the business of
Republicans, though that was always a little bit unfair, since the basic
doctrine had been formulated in the Truman Administration by Dean Acheson and
others. Republicans were seen as tougher, steadier and more trustworthy in an
era when "standing up to the Russians" was a major preoccupation -- some would
say a fixation -- of the United States.

Now it is the Republicans who feel hard done by. Having won the cold war, as
they see it, they get no credit for it, as Mr. Bush has repeatedly and rather
incredulously complained. Not only that; the voters turn their attention
elsewhere, refocusing on the kinds of domestic issues that have always suited
the Democrats.

This fundamental shift has taken place at a time of economic stringency, which
helped the Democrats even when foreign policy problems and emphasis on social
issues eventually enabled the Republicans to triumph. In 1968, for example,
Hubert H. Humphrey almost caught Richard M. Nixon, despite the crushing
unpopularity of Johnson and the Vietnam War, by talking of nothing but what Mr.
Humphrey called "lunch bucket issues" in the final weeks.

On economic grounds, Mr. Bush is more vulnerable than most Presidents, who
usually manage the economy so as to make recoveries coincide with Election Day.
The President says the recovery has been under way for months, but it is so
feeble that few voters have noticed it. Staggering under the burden of the
lowest growth rate since Herbert Hoover, Mr. Bush enters the convention with
only about a third of the electorate viewing him favorably and with about
three-fourths saying the country is on the wrong track.

Focus on Economic Weakness

The fear of national decline now centers not on Communist encroachment or
subversion, but on economic weakness, exacerbated by poor education.

Desperate, convinced that Mr. Bush kicked away much of his credibility by
raising taxes, some conservatives like Jack F. Kemp, the Housing Secretary, are
pressing for renewed tax cuts, and the President may accommodate them. Other
conservatives worry more about cutting the massive deficit. Some preach the
virtue of free trade, others the peril of losing jobs to Mexico.

The suspicion grows that the Republican coalition is coming apart, as did
Roosevelt's alliance of segregationists and blacks, labor skates and urban
bosses. Like most coalitions, the Republican alliance has always seemed a bit
weird, with its combination of country clubbers, big-city ethnic Democrats and
religious fundamentalists; like most coalitions, it was always too unstable to
last.

More than anything else, it was the social issues that made possible the union
of Archie Bunker and Jerry Falwell and the town banker and doctor -- things like
busing, sexual license, crime in the streets, recreational drugs and long hair.
Those issues are not dead yet; the Texas Republicans are convinced that they can
beat Mr. Clinton mainly on gun control and the support he has won from
homosexuals.

Contortions Over Abortion

But if they are not dead, the social issues are relatively dormant. The major
exception is abortion, the cornerstone of the Republicans' "family values" theme
for 1992, but it causes the party serious problems. The reasons were on display
last week in the contortions Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, went through as the
convention moved toward a hard-line platform plank on the subject.

The fundamentalists and allies like Phyllis Schlafly, the Illinois publicist for
conservative social causes, were thrilled with the platform. Martin Mawyer,
president of the Christian Action Network, called it "written evidence that the
religious right is alive, well and active."

But many of the more traditional Republicans, including many of the Bushes'
social friends, are outraged by the platform's utter rejection of abortion in
any circumstances. And many of the Reagan Democrats are far more concerned about
jobs than abortions. In Macomb County, north of Detroit, the epitome of Middle
American defection from the Democrats for 25 years, the polls and the
politicians say that many of the defectors are coming home.

It is conservatives who have always been most suspicious of Mr. Bush, and some
of their spokesmen, including Richard Viguerie, the fund-raiser, even called
upon him to step down. But as Kevin Phillips, the political analyst who first
described the emerging Republican majority, noted the other day, "There's
widespread discontent in the middle, too, not only on abortion, but supply-side
economics and trade and the issue of decline."

Closer to the Democrats

The centrists, the independents and the ticket-splitters count as much as ever.
In The New York Times/CBS News Poll taken this month, 28 percent of the voters
described themselves as Republicans, compared to 33 percent who called
themselves Democrats. And of the self-described independents (33 percent),
almost half said they thought of themselves as closer to the Democrats than the
Republicans.

Unless the convention and what follows it can produce another of the stunning
reversals that have marked this year, those figures mean trouble not only for
Mr. Bush but also for his party; they threaten to cancel out the advantages in
Congressional elections that Republicans thought they had gained from
reapportionment, which has switched seats toward the Sun Belt states, and from
public anger with the Democratic-controlled Congress.

Mr. Bush has been appealing for an end to divided government. As the convention
begins, the President has an opportunity to change people's minds the way Mr.
Clinton did in New York last month. The danger for the Republicans is that the
country will heed Mr. Bush's message by electing Mr. Clinton in November and
returning the Democrats to their accustomed places on Capitol Hill.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: Views of 2 Presidents: How
Bush and Reagan Compare," tracks approval ratings for Presidents Ronald Reagan
and George Bush during their first terms in office. (Source: Based on polls
conducted by The New York Times and CBS News.)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

PARTY IN THE SPOTLIGHT;
After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 16


It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with
the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win
another Presidential election.

Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up
five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of
its members became the first President to resign. Until a few months ago,
Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats
might never win another Presidential election.

But as Republicans trooped into Houston this weekend to renominate George Bush,
there were signs that their glory days might be numbered. The building blocks of
their ascendancy, anti-Communism and social issues, no longer control the
agenda, and Mr. Bush and his strategists appear unsure about what they can do to
compensate.

Some Traditional Talismans

Politics is cyclical, especially Presidential politics. Thirty years in power
followed by thirty years in the wilderness is the usual formula, according to
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian, though it is seldom so exact. The
weakening of party loyalties may have somewhat truncated the pattern, and the
Republican string may be running out after only 25 years.

Republicans cling to traditional talismans. Modern incumbents do not lose unless
some cataclysmic event (the Depression, Watergate, the Iran hostage crisis)
disrupts their term. Candidates do not usually win on their first try for the
Presidency, nor do candidates from small states like Arkansas often manage to
prevail (not since Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire, anyway). And since the New
Hampshire primary was instituted, no one has been elected President who did not
first win that state's primary. Bill Clinton came in second.

But the brakes of history seem to be working against Mr. Bush and his party. The
Republicans seem to be losing momentum, the same way the New Deal/Fair Deal/New
Frontier/Great Society did after four victories by Franklin D. Roosevelt and one
each by Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

From Swords to Plowshares

The end of the cold war has robbed the President's party of one of its mightiest
swords. The nation came to see the containment of Communism as the business of
Republicans, though that was always a little bit unfair, since the basic
doctrine had been formulated in the Truman Administration by Dean Acheson and
others. Republicans were seen as tougher, steadier and more trustworthy in an
era when "standing up to the Russians" was a major preoccupation -- some would
say a fixation -- of the United States.

Now it is the Republicans who feel hard done by. Having won the cold war, as
they see it, they get no credit for it, as Mr. Bush has repeatedly and rather
incredulously complained. Not only that; the voters turn their attention
elsewhere, refocusing on the kinds of domestic issues that have always suited
the Democrats.

This fundamental shift has taken place at a time of economic stringency, which
helped the Democrats even when foreign policy problems and emphasis on social
issues eventually enabled the Republicans to triumph. In 1968, for example,
Hubert H. Humphrey almost caught Richard M. Nixon, despite the crushing
unpopularity of Johnson and the Vietnam War, by talking of nothing but what Mr.
Humphrey called "lunch bucket issues" in the final weeks.

On economic grounds, Mr. Bush is more vulnerable than most Presidents, who
usually manage the economy so as to make recoveries coincide with Election Day.
The President says the recovery has been under way for months, but it is so
feeble that few voters have noticed it. Staggering under the burden of the
lowest growth rate since Herbert Hoover, Mr. Bush enters the convention with
only about a third of the electorate viewing him favorably and with about
three-fourths saying the country is on the wrong track.

Focus on Economic Weakness

The fear of national decline now centers not on Communist encroachment or
subversion, but on economic weakness, exacerbated by poor education.

Desperate, convinced that Mr. Bush kicked away much of his credibility by
raising taxes, some conservatives like Jack F. Kemp, the Housing Secretary, are
pressing for renewed tax cuts, and the President may accommodate them. Other
conservatives worry more about cutting the massive deficit. Some preach the
virtue of free trade, others the peril of losing jobs to Mexico.

The suspicion grows that the Republican coalition is coming apart, as did
Roosevelt's alliance of segregationists and blacks, labor skates and urban
bosses. Like most coalitions, the Republican alliance has always seemed a bit
weird, with its combination of country clubbers, big-city ethnic Democrats and
religious fundamentalists; like most coalitions, it was always too unstable to
last.

More than anything else, it was the social issues that made possible the union
of Archie Bunker and Jerry Falwell and the town banker and doctor -- things like
busing, sexual license, crime in the streets, recreational drugs and long hair.
Those issues are not dead yet; the Texas Republicans are convinced that they can
beat Mr. Clinton mainly on gun control and the support he has won from
homosexuals.

Contortions Over Abortion

But if they are not dead, the social issues are relatively dormant. The major
exception is abortion, the cornerstone of the Republicans' "family values" theme
for 1992, but it causes the party serious problems. The reasons were on display
last week in the contortions Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, went through as the
convention moved toward a hard-line platform plank on the subject.

The fundamentalists and allies like Phyllis Schlafly, the Illinois publicist for
conservative social causes, were thrilled with the platform. Martin Mawyer,
president of the Christian Action Network, called it "written evidence that the
religious right is alive, well and active."

But many of the more traditional Republicans, including many of the Bushes'
social friends, are outraged by the platform's utter rejection of abortion in
any circumstances. And many of the Reagan Democrats are far more concerned about
jobs than abortions. In Macomb County, north of Detroit, the epitome of Middle
American defection from the Democrats for 25 years, the polls and the
politicians say that many of the defectors are coming home.

It is conservatives who have always been most suspicious of Mr. Bush, and some
of their spokesmen, including Richard Viguerie, the fund-raiser, even called
upon him to step down. But as Kevin Phillips, the political analyst who first
described the emerging Republican majority, noted the other day, "There's
widespread discontent in the middle, too, not only on abortion, but supply-side
economics and trade and the issue of decline."

Closer to the Democrats

The centrists, the independents and the ticket-splitters count as much as ever.
In The New York Times/CBS News Poll taken this month, 28 percent of the voters
described themselves as Republicans, compared to 33 percent who called
themselves Democrats. And of the self-described independents (33 percent),
almost half said they thought of themselves as closer to the Democrats than the
Republicans.

Unless the convention and what follows it can produce another of the stunning
reversals that have marked this year, those figures mean trouble not only for
Mr. Bush but also for his party; they threaten to cancel out the advantages in
Congressional elections that Republicans thought they had gained from
reapportionment, which has switched seats toward the Sun Belt states, and from
public anger with the Democratic-controlled Congress.

Mr. Bush has been appealing for an end to divided government. As the convention
begins, the President has an opportunity to change people's minds the way Mr.
Clinton did in New York last month. The danger for the Republicans is that the
country will heed Mr. Bush's message by electing Mr. Clinton in November and
returning the Democrats to their accustomed places on Capitol Hill.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: Views of 2 Presidents: How
Bush and Reagan Compare," tracks approval ratings for Presidents Ronald Reagan
and George Bush during their first terms in office. (Source: Based on polls
conducted by The New York Times and CBS News.)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

PARTY IN THE SPOTLIGHT;
After a Long Ascendancy, G.O.P. Seems to Falter

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 16


It is more than a quarter of a century now since the Republicans hit bottom with
the humiliation of Barry Goldwater and people began saying they might never win
another Presidential election.

Instead, the party of Lincoln has staged one of its greatest runs, piling up
five victories while losing the White House only once, and then only when one of
its members became the first President to resign. Until a few months ago,
Republicans seemed so invulnerable that some experts were saying the Democrats
might never win another Presidential election.

But as Republicans trooped into Houston this weekend to renominate George Bush,
there were signs that their glory days might be numbered. The building blocks of
their ascendancy, anti-Communism and social issues, no longer control the
agenda, and Mr. Bush and his strategists appear unsure about what they can do to
compensate.

Some Traditional Talismans

Politics is cyclical, especially Presidential politics. Thirty years in power
followed by thirty years in the wilderness is the usual formula, according to
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian, though it is seldom so exact. The
weakening of party loyalties may have somewhat truncated the pattern, and the
Republican string may be running out after only 25 years.

Republicans cling to traditional talismans. Modern incumbents do not lose unless
some cataclysmic event (the Depression, Watergate, the Iran hostage crisis)
disrupts their term. Candidates do not usually win on their first try for the
Presidency, nor do candidates from small states like Arkansas often manage to
prevail (not since Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire, anyway). And since the New
Hampshire primary was instituted, no one has been elected President who did not
first win that state's primary. Bill Clinton came in second.

But the brakes of history seem to be working against Mr. Bush and his party. The
Republicans seem to be losing momentum, the same way the New Deal/Fair Deal/New
Frontier/Great Society did after four victories by Franklin D. Roosevelt and one
each by Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

From Swords to Plowshares

The end of the cold war has robbed the President's party of one of its mightiest
swords. The nation came to see the containment of Communism as the business of
Republicans, though that was always a little bit unfair, since the basic
doctrine had been formulated in the Truman Administration by Dean Acheson and
others. Republicans were seen as tougher, steadier and more trustworthy in an
era when "standing up to the Russians" was a major preoccupation -- some would
say a fixation -- of the United States.

Now it is the Republicans who feel hard done by. Having won the cold war, as
they see it, they get no credit for it, as Mr. Bush has repeatedly and rather
incredulously complained. Not only that; the voters turn their attention
elsewhere, refocusing on the kinds of domestic issues that have always suited
the Democrats.

This fundamental shift has taken place at a time of economic stringency, which
helped the Democrats even when foreign policy problems and emphasis on social
issues eventually enabled the Republicans to triumph. In 1968, for example,
Hubert H. Humphrey almost caught Richard M. Nixon, despite the crushing
unpopularity of Johnson and the Vietnam War, by talking of nothing but what Mr.
Humphrey called "lunch bucket issues" in the final weeks.

On economic grounds, Mr. Bush is more vulnerable than most Presidents, who
usually manage the economy so as to make recoveries coincide with Election Day.
The President says the recovery has been under way for months, but it is so
feeble that few voters have noticed it. Staggering under the burden of the
lowest growth rate since Herbert Hoover, Mr. Bush enters the convention with
only about a third of the electorate viewing him favorably and with about
three-fourths saying the country is on the wrong track.

Focus on Economic Weakness

The fear of national decline now centers not on Communist encroachment or
subversion, but on economic weakness, exacerbated by poor education.

Desperate, convinced that Mr. Bush kicked away much of his credibility by
raising taxes, some conservatives like Jack F. Kemp, the Housing Secretary, are
pressing for renewed tax cuts, and the President may accommodate them. Other
conservatives worry more about cutting the massive deficit. Some preach the
virtue of free trade, others the peril of losing jobs to Mexico.

The suspicion grows that the Republican coalition is coming apart, as did
Roosevelt's alliance of segregationists and blacks, labor skates and urban
bosses. Like most coalitions, the Republican alliance has always seemed a bit
weird, with its combination of country clubbers, big-city ethnic Democrats and
religious fundamentalists; like most coalitions, it was always too unstable to
last.

More than anything else, it was the social issues that made possible the union
of Archie Bunker and Jerry Falwell and the town banker and doctor -- things like
busing, sexual license, crime in the streets, recreational drugs and long hair.
Those issues are not dead yet; the Texas Republicans are convinced that they can
beat Mr. Clinton mainly on gun control and the support he has won from
homosexuals.

Contortions Over Abortion

But if they are not dead, the social issues are relatively dormant. The major
exception is abortion, the cornerstone of the Republicans' "family values" theme
for 1992, but it causes the party serious problems. The reasons were on display
last week in the contortions Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, went through as the
convention moved toward a hard-line platform plank on the subject.

The fundamentalists and allies like Phyllis Schlafly, the Illinois publicist for
conservative social causes, were thrilled with the platform. Martin Mawyer,
president of the Christian Action Network, called it "written evidence that the
religious right is alive, well and active."

But many of the more traditional Republicans, including many of the Bushes'
social friends, are outraged by the platform's utter rejection of abortion in
any circumstances. And many of the Reagan Democrats are far more concerned about
jobs than abortions. In Macomb County, north of Detroit, the epitome of Middle
American defection from the Democrats for 25 years, the polls and the
politicians say that many of the defectors are coming home.

It is conservatives who have always been most suspicious of Mr. Bush, and some
of their spokesmen, including Richard Viguerie, the fund-raiser, even called
upon him to step down. But as Kevin Phillips, the political analyst who first
described the emerging Republican majority, noted the other day, "There's
widespread discontent in the middle, too, not only on abortion, but supply-side
economics and trade and the issue of decline."

Closer to the Democrats

The centrists, the independents and the ticket-splitters count as much as ever.
In The New York Times/CBS News Poll taken this month, 28 percent of the voters
described themselves as Republicans, compared to 33 percent who called
themselves Democrats. And of the self-described independents (33 percent),
almost half said they thought of themselves as closer to the Democrats than the
Republicans.

Unless the convention and what follows it can produce another of the stunning
reversals that have marked this year, those figures mean trouble not only for
Mr. Bush but also for his party; they threaten to cancel out the advantages in
Congressional elections that Republicans thought they had gained from
reapportionment, which has switched seats toward the Sun Belt states, and from
public anger with the Democratic-controlled Congress.

Mr. Bush has been appealing for an end to divided government. As the convention
begins, the President has an opportunity to change people's minds the way Mr.
Clinton did in New York last month. The danger for the Republicans is that the
country will heed Mr. Bush's message by electing Mr. Clinton in November and
returning the Democrats to their accustomed places on Capitol Hill.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: Views of 2 Presidents: How
Bush and Reagan Compare," tracks approval ratings for Presidents Ronald Reagan
and George Bush during their first terms in office. (Source: Based on polls
conducted by The New York Times and CBS News.)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

IN THEIR OWN WORDS: THE OVERVIEW;
BUSH VOWS A TOUGH CAMPAIGN AS G.O.P. OPENS ITS CONVENTION

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 1602 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 17


President Bush roared into his convention city tonight with a vow to revive his
lagging re-election campaign, and Ronald Reagan bestowed his blessing as an
anxious Republican National Convention began a search for its old electoral
magic.

At a rally near the Astrodome, Mr. Bush delivered a rousing attack on his
Democratic opponents that suggested a bruising, hard-fought fall. "For the next
78 days, we're going to go out and ask the people of America to answer a very
simple question: Who do you trust to do what's right for the United States of
America?"

Mr. Reagan, speaking in the Astrodome, asserted that the nation needed Mr. Bush
to continue the work of insuring peace abroad and conservative reforms at home.
"A lot of liberal Democrats are saying it's time for a change, and they're
right," declared Mr. Reagan, who rode to power with a similar call 12 years ago.
"The only trouble is they're pointing to the wrong end of Pennsylvania Avenue."
[Excerpts from Mr. Bush's and Mr. Reagan's remarks, page A8.]

Reagan's Long Memory

As if to underscore his support for a successor still struggling to secure the
conservative base, Mr. Reagan declared, "I warmly, genuinely, wholeheartedly
support the re-election of George Bush as President of the United States." The
81-year-old Mr. Reagan rocked the convention with a vintage display of his
oratorical skills and a precisely timed series of jokes about his age and the
Democrats.

"This fellow they've nominated claims he's the new Thomas Jefferson," Mr. Reagan
said. "Well, let me tell you something. I knew Thomas Jefferson. He was a friend
of mine. And Governor, you're no Thomas Jefferson." Mr. Reagan was playfully
alluding to a barb Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas hurled at Dan Quayle in a
Vice-Presidential debate in 1988.

Mr. Reagan capped an evening that Republicans hoped would galvanize the party's
base, raise serious doubts about Gov. Bill Clinton, and remind voters of the
optimism of the Reagan years and Mr. Bush's connection to it.  At the end of the
speech, Mr. Reagan summoned his wife, Nancy, to the stage for a nostalgic
tableau of the 1980's: Mr. Reagan with a cocky smile, Mrs. Reagan in a red
dress, a cascade of balloons and a cheering crowd.

Conservative Call to Arms

Mr. Bush received another blessing from a former rival, Patrick J. Buchanan, who
won repeated cheers with a full-throated defense of the 1980's and a
conservative call to arms.

The Republicans began their 35th national convention by approving a platform
that reaffirms the party's implacable opposition to legalized abortion and
support for a constitutional amendment that would outlaw it. It marked the
official end of a struggle by supporters of abortion rights to buck their
President and ease their party's stance, but the dissension simmered
nonetheless.

Many delegates here talked openly of their disagreement with the party's
abortion plank, but the Bush campaign was in firm control of the proceedings and
averted a floor fight on the issue. Mr. Bush said today in an interview
broadcast by CNN that he was "unashamedly pro-life."

But Mary Dent Crisp, the chairwoman of the National Republican Coalition for
Choice, asserted, "The men in power have won a short-term battle, but the
ultimate battle -- the November election -- is still ahead."

Republicans filled the opening session of their their four-day convention with
predictions of a powerful Bush comeback and chants of "four more years." Mr.
Bush and Vice President Quayle appeared together at an ebullient rally in an
arena adjoining the Astrodome, with Mr. Bush delivering a speech that amounted
to a convention kickoff.

"For nine months, the other side has had a one-way conversation with the
American people," Mr. Bush declared. "And now it's our turn."

He added that after reading recent interviews with Mr. Clinton, he
"half-expected, when I went over to the Oval Office, to find him over there
measuring the drapes." The President, in a spirited performance clearly intended
to signal a rejuvenated campaign, declared, "I'm a fighter."

He added: "Let me say, as the first shot out of the barrel -- put those drapes
on hold. It's going to be curtains time for that ticket."

Another War to Win

Mr. Quayle sounded another theme for this carefully scripted week: "Our
President won the cold war. Let's give him a new Congress and let him win the
domestic war."

Mr. Clinton came under heavy fire from an array of Republican speakers today,
who accused him of being a failed Governor, a secret taxer and spender, a man
who sought to avoid the draft, and a leader utterly unequipped to conduct
American foreign policy.

The news media came under a carefully coordinated attack as well, with numerous
Republicans portraying journalists as irredeemably biased in favor of Mr.
Clinton. "Bill Clinton, who's suddenly become the darling of the news media, Mr.
Wonderful," scoffed Richard N. Bond, the Republican national chairman, in his
speech to the convention's morning session.

But the real business of this convention was regaining control of a Presidential
campaign in which Mr. Bush lags behind Mr. Clinton by 17 percentage points in
the latest New York Times CBS/News Poll. To do that, Republicans are trying to
remind their national television audience of the achievements and qualities that
once sent Mr. Bush skyrocketing in the polls.

The Republicans used much of their opening day to highlight Mr. Bush's record in
foreign policy, casting the Reagan-Bush years as an era of strength and
fortitude that helped end the cold war. Bush campaign strategists say that while
voters are now consumed with domestic policy, the role and responsibilities of
Commander in Chief will eventually be important factors in their decision.

Today, several speakers talked of the risk of turning American foreign policy
over to a Governor from Arkansas. "He is inexperienced, unprepared and unlikely
to build soundly on the foundation so carefully laid by Ronald Reagan and George
Bush over the past 12 years," said Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana, a senior
Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Mr. Quayle, at a forum this afternoon sponsored by the American Israel Public
Affairs Committee, echoed the attack. "Bill Clinton's foreign policy experience
is a summer internship with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee," Mr. Quayle
said. "In the area of foreign policy, we ought to compare the experience of Bill
Clinton with the experience of George Bush, and it is no comparison at all."

The Republicans were also trying to conclude some leftover business from the
primaries. Mr. Buchanan, the conservative commentator who proved a troublesome
challenger to Mr. Bush in the New Hampshire Primary, delivered an endorsement of
his former rival tonight and a biting attack on Mr. Clinton that hinted of the
commentator's 1996 potential.

Hillary Clinton Assailed

"The American people are not going to buy back into the failed liberalism of the
1960's and 1970's, no matter how slick the package in 1992," Mr. Buchanan said.
Denouncing the Democratic candidate's wife, Hillary Clinton, as a champion of
"radical feminism," Mr. Buchanan asserted tht "Clinton & Clinton" would impose a
far-left agenda on the nation.

Mr. Buchanan also raised the issue of Mr. Clinton's draft record, which many
Republicans say could be damaging to the Governor in the South.  Alluding to Mr.
Bush's war record as a Navy pilot, Mr. Buchanan added scornfully, "When Bill
Clinton's time came in Vietnam, he sat up in a dormitory in Oxford, England, and
figured out how to dodge the draft."

Mr. Clinton has repeatedly denied that he sought to avoid serving during
Vietnam, although he has conceded that he changed his mind about joining the
Reserve Officers Training Corps when it became clear that his number would
probably not be called in the draft lottery.

The Republicans quickly approved a platform that delighted the party's
conservative wing: an impassioned endorsement of restricted government, free
enterprise, and a social agenda that ranges from opposition to gun control to
support for tuition subsidies for private and religious schools.

One Endorsement Withheld

The approval went smoothly, after a final but futile flurry of activity by
abortion-rights supporters. But the delicacy of the issue was apparent. Even as
he reiterated his anti-abortion stance, Mr. Bush told CNN, "There are a lot of
other things that people care about."

Ms. Crisp said the coalition for choice would not make an endorsement in the
Presidential election this year.

By nightfall another drama had begun: Mr. Bush arrived for what many Republicans
acknowledge is a make-or-break week for his lagging campaign. At the evening
rally, shortly after Air Force One touched down at Ellington Field, Mr. Bush did
what Republicans have urged him to do for months. He attacked Mr. Clinton and
his running mate, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, harshly and by name.

"They've called our great country a mockery and sounded the saxophone of
change," Mr. Bush scoffed. "Don't kid yourself -- they'll say anything, anything
to get elected. Say one thing in one place and whisper another in another."

Mr. Bush's speech, inside an arena packed with supporters punching the air with
their signs and filling the night with their chants and cowbells, clearly
energized a group that has longed for a more aggressive campaign. "Dy-no-mite!"
said Gloria Olson, a delegate from Bismarck, N.D. "I was fired up.  That's what
we want -- we want him to come out fighting."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush and his wife, Barbara, wading through a sea of
delegates arriving to hear him at a rally. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)
(pg. A1); Delegates listening to former President Ronald Reagan speaking last
night at the Republican convention. (Associated Press) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words



International A3-6

U.N. CANCELS INSPECTION IN IRAQ
U.N. inspectors in Baghdad canceled a visit to a military ministry considered
off-limits by Iraq, abandoning for now a U.S. plan to demand access to sensitive
sites.  A1

IRAQI AIR ATTACKS EXPECTED
A U.S. proposal to protect Shiites in southern Iraq from air attacks by Baghdad
comes as intelligence reports indicate that Iraq is preparing to renew an
offensive against the Shiites, the White House says.  A6

Iraq's official newspapers heaped scorn on President Bush.  A6
The U.S. heft in the U.N. could permit unilateral military action.  A6

CAMBODIA PEACE PACT IN DOUBT
Nearly a year after the U.N. brokered an accord to end Cambodia's decades of
bloodshed, the settlement may collapse because of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge
to disarm its soldiers.  A1

WINTER WARNING ON BOSNIA
A senior U.N. official warned that 200,000 to 300,000 people could die in Bosnia
and Herzegovina this winter from epidemics and exposure if relief agencies did
not immediately step up deliveries.  A3

WRONG PORT FOR 150 ASIANS
At least 150 Asians, apparently trying to reach the United States illegally,
landed on the southern coast of Haiti.  A3

South Africa is reeling from the political repercussions of a rugby match.  A4

Buenos Aires Journal: A surgeon builds his dream clinic. A4

The Convention A7-11

G.O.P. CONVENTION BEGINS
President Bush roared into Houston with a vow to revive his re-election
campaign, and Ronald Reagan bestowed his blessing as an anxious Republican
National Convention began a search for its old electoral magic.  A1

BEDEVILED BY UNCERTAINTY
News analysis: George Bush arrived in Houston with the specter of a one-term
Presidency and without the politically priceless air of inevitability that so
enveloped Ronald Reagan in 1984.  A1

FIGHT OVER ABORTION AVERTED
The Bush campaign averted a convention-floor debate on the abortion issue by
appealing for an image of unity. Yet polls of delegates showed that few favored
the rigid anti-abortion plank, and the Bush camp sought to place some distance
between the President and the platform.  A10

G.O.P. PUNCHING BAG: THE PRESS
Press bashing is an honored G.O.P. tradition, but this year, Republicans from
President Bush on down are mounting an unusually bitter assault.  A7

A RARE STAR TURN FOR MRS. QUAYLE
In 1988, Bush campaign aides tried to keep Marilyn Quayle in the background,
fearing her fierce personality would overwhelm her husband's. This year they are
giving her unprecedented star billing for one major reason: Hillary Clinton.  A7


AH, YES, THEY REMEMBER IT WELL
 Nostalgia swept the Astrodome as Ronald and Nancy Reagan entered, and
Republicans recalled fond memories of the 1980's: Adolfo. Ivan Boesky.
Cigarettes.  A7

Excerpts from the Republican Party's official platform.  A10

The party chairman, Richard Bond, should have identity problems.  A11

Campaign Watch: Confidence eludes G.O.P. officials on television.  A9

The Clinton campaign counters G.O.P. convention publicity.  A11

National A7-17

FREEDOM SEVERS PARTNERSHIP
For 15 years, two murderers doing time in a Louisiana prison produced the
premier publication of prison muckraking, The Angolite magazine, in the process
changing countless features of prison life. Now one man is free to join his new
wife, but he must leave behind his closest soulmate.  A1

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN UPHELD
A Federal district judge upheld an affirmative action plan for the City of
Birmingham, Ala., that includes numerical hiring goals that were attacked by the
Reagan and Bush Administrations.  A12

PUSH TO MOVE EXPLOSIVE CASE
The judge presiding over the retrial of a former Miami police officer accused in
the 1989 deaths of two black men recommended that the case, which had been
shifted to two other cities, be transferred again: back to the Florida capital.
A15

REVIEWING U.S. ROLE IN 'IVAN' CASE
A Federal appeals court ordered a special inquiry into the Justice Department
investigation of John Demjanjuk, who was stripped of his citizenship and sent to
Israel to stand trial as "Ivan the Terrible." A16

1 BRIDGE, 1.5 MILLION BATS
Austin Journal: Thanks to a pest controller's acts of mercy and the welcoming
niches of a bridge, this city is now home to the continent's largest urban
colony of bats.  A12

Testimony in the Clair George trial ended without Robert Gates.  A17

Hot Californians flocked to the sand but dared not enter the surf.  A14

Metro Digest B1

INCINERATOR AGREEMENT
The Dinkins administration and the leadership of the City Council have agreed to
go ahead with construction of a $550 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy
Yard while at the same time increasing New York City's recycling program.  A1

INSURING MINORITY WORK
Armed with a new study that shows minority-owned businesses still get a
relatively small share of state contracts, New York State is resurrecting a
program that requires contractors to reserve a proportion of state work for
companies headed by women and minorites.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science C1-9

When childen become adults, sibling conflict may remain.  C1

Vietnam aftermath still hampers Agent Orange research.  C4

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Unearthing archeological treasures in Israel.  C11

Sports B6-13

Bonilla looks back, and ahead.  B7

White Sox beat Yankees, 4-3.  B7

Connors to play in U.S. Open.  B9

O'Brien signs with Jets.  B7

Obituaries D19

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

The Republicans: unchanged.

What's still missing on M.I.A.'s.

Finally, help for Somalia.

Topics: A death in Iran.

Letters

Russell Baker: The way they were.

Richard Ben Cramer: Bush is down.
Now watch out.

Christopher Cox and Michael Horowitz: Congress is the problem.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Pact Founders on Attacks and Distrust

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2046 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 11


Nearly a year after the United Nations brokered a peace accord intended to end
Cambodia's decades of bloodshed and terror, the settlement is under threat of
collapse because of the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to disarm their tens of
thousands of rebel soldiers.

Some diplomats and Cambodians remain hopeful that the Maoist-inspired Khmer
Rouge will begin at least a partial disarmament in time for elections next
spring, but no one can be certain of the intentions of the secretive group.

In Phnom Penh, which has become a chaotic boom town with the arrival of more
than 18,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops and civilian workers, there is a
debate over what should be done if the Khmer Rouge remain obstinate and do not
disarm. The alternatives include using armed United Nations troops to force the
Khmer Rouge to cooperate.

The Khmer Rouge controlled the government in the 1970's and directed a "peasant
revolution," a radical restructuring of Cambodian society. Estimates of the
number of Cambodians who died range from hundreds of thousands to more than one
million.

One of four warring factions that signed the peace accord, the Khmer Rouge have
issued a set of demands intended to strengthen their hand in the elections and
to dismantle the current Vietnamese-installed Government.

During a visit to Phnom Penh this month, the United States representative to the
United Nations, Edward J. Perkins, said in an interview that "I'm more hopeful
than not hopeful" about the prospects for peace. "Of course," he added, "I don't
know what is on the mind of the Khmer Rouge."

Diplomats say any grounds for hope lies in the expectation that the Khmer Rouge
will determine, on the basis of a cold calcuation of the facts and nothing else,
that they must return to the peace process and begin to demobilize. According to
this reasoning, Khmer Rouge leaders would otherwise risk being abandoned by
their remaining allies, most importantly the Chinese Government and the Thai
military, and giving up whatever international legitimacy they have secured
through the peace settlement.

Even if the current stalemate is resolved with the Khmer Rouge, however,
diplomats and many Cambodians agree that the peace process is almost certain to
bog down again and again as the Khmer Rouge and other factions demand new
concessions.

It is impossible to find anyone here who believes that the guerrillas of the
Khmer Rouge will ever simply lay down their arms and disappear into the jungle,
even if their leaders do agree to rejoin the peace process this year.

A Sense of Relief

Despite so many dire predictions about Cambodia's future, the presence of the
large United Nations force has produced in many Cambodians a sense of relief,
even of opportunity, that they had never experienced.

There have been repeated cease-fire violations in recent months by the Khmer
Rouge, including shooting attacks on United Nations helicopters flying over
their territory, but military observers describe the Cambodian countryside as
generally peaceful.

Taking advantage of what many acknowledge could be only an intermission in the
civil war, foreign investors and wealthy Cambodians have created the
fastest-growing if most chaotic and speculative economy in Southeast Asia.

Even as most of its residents continue to live in utter poverty, Phnom Penh,
like provincial capitals elsewhere in Cambodia, is now one big construction
site, with hotels, restaurants and office buildings under construction or
renovation.

For a visitor who knows of Phnom Penh only as the city from which the Khmer
Rouge directed their campaign to return Cambodia to "Year Zero," the effect of a
downtown stroll can be jarring.

Newsstands have begun selling fresh copies of glossy Western magazines, and
there are two new English-language newspapers in the capital, The Phnom Penh
Post and The Cambodia Times. Stores are stocked with yogurt and cheese from
Thailand and crisp red apples from Washington State.

Singaporean investors can be found thrashing out business deals over espresso in
a pricey new French bistro that picked up and moved here, staff and all, from
Bangkok, Thailand.

The owners of Cambodia's new international airline have enough confidence in the
future that they have leased an American jet and hired an experienced Icelandic
crew. The phones are working properly for the first time in years.

The question bedeviling diplomats, foreign business people and many Cambodians
is: Can the United Nations pull out of Cambodia on schedule next year, even if
the Khmer Rouge agree to return to the peace process?

The United Nations, it is feared, will be marooned here. Without the presence of
the peacekeeping force, many here argue, the hard-won peace will collapse as
Cambodians, many of whom have known only battle or genocidal terror in their
lifetimes, find themselves unable to manage a government.

Sawn Van Thay, a 39-year-old tailor whose shop is just off Achar Mean Boulevard,
the capital's congested central thoroughfare, offers a hope common among
Cambodians: He wants the United Nations to remain here for years.

"It must be here for 15, maybe 20 years, so we can raise and educate a
generation of children who will capable of running a government," he said, his
seamstress turning from her work to nod, frantically, in agreement.

Fear of War's Return

"The Khmer Rouge killed all the people who had education," he said. "If the
United Nations soldiers leave, we will go back to squabbling and then to war.
The United Nations must stay many, many years."

That, United Nations officials insist, will not happen, especially with the
Security Council now contemplating additional responsibilities in what used to
be Yugoslavia.

"We are not here to solve all the problems of Cambodia," said Yasushi Akashi,
the Japanese-born diplomat who is in charge of the United Nations operation in
Cambodia, vowing that peacekeeping troops will not have a "perpetual presence"
here.

He hedged, however, when asked whether the peacekeeping forces would be able to
leave on schedule after elections next year.

"I will raise questions on the part of my colleagues in New York whatever answer
I give you, so please excuse me," he said. "I hope so," is the best response
that he can give for now.

The Khmer Rouge are taking part in the peace settlement hammered out by the
United Nations. The nominal leader of the group is Khieu Samphan, a
French-educated Cambodian economist, who is believed by diplomats to answer to
Pol Pot, the shadowy founder of the Khmer Rouge.

Mr. Pol Pot, whose real name is Saloth Sar, has been in hiding for most of his
adult life. He is said to move between Thailand and western Cambodia.

Unlike the army of the Vietnamese-installed Government and the other two rebel
groups involved in the peace accord, the Khmer Rouge have so far refused to put
down their arms and place their soldiers in United Nations-supervised camps, a
process that was supposed to begin in June.

Khmer Rouge officials have said their troops will not disarm until more
authority is taken away from the central Government and given to a neutral
interim body and until there is proof that all Vietnamese troops have left
Cambodia. The Vietnamese ousted the Khmer Rouge in an invasion that began in
December 1978

Council Led by Sihanouk

The neutral body, the Supreme National Council, is made up of representatives of
all four factions in the peace settlement and is led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
the nation's former monarch and its newly restored head of state.

One of Prince Sihanouk's sons, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, leads one of the other
two rebel factions. The smallest faction, the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, is directed by former Prime Minister Son Sann.

The United Nations says that it has already done what it can to satisfy the
demands of the Khmer Rouge.

Diplomats observing the peace process say they are heartened that China and
Thailand, longtime patrons of the Khmer Rouge, have publicly demanded that the
Khmer Rouge disarm. In an effort to exert pressure on the Khmer Rouge to
cooperate with United Nations peacekeepers in Cambodia, a high-ranking Chinese
official reportedly held a rare meeting in Bangkok last week with Mr. Pol Pot.

There is also excitement in diplomatic circles over reports of a consistent flow
of deserters from the Khmer Rouge in recent weeks.

Still the Khmer Rouge appear to have remarkable staying power, thanks to vast
stocks of weapons and to its control over gem-mining and logging areas near
Cambodia's Western border. The gems and lumber produce tens of millions of
dollars a year for the Khmer Rouge, most of it funneled through Thai businessmen
who seem to care little about their Government's public efforts to isolate the
rebels.

The peacekeeping operation in Cambodia is the largest in the history of the
United Nations, with a budget approaching $2 billion and a staff drawn from more
than 100 nations. There are about 15,100 soldiers, 2,100 police officers and
1,000 civilians.

A Comforting Sight

Across the Cambodian countryside, the sight of United Nations soldiers and the
blue United Nations flag has become familiar, and comforting, to many
Cambodians.

"When they see us now, they always smile and welcome us," said Cpl. Salim
Zakaria, a 25-year-old Malaysian policeman who now walks the beat in Phnom Penh.

Yet the arrival of the United Nations has plainly not been all good news to all
Cambodians. The presence of so many free-spending foreigners -- many civilian
United Nations workers have a living allowance well in excess of $100 a day --
has aggravated Cambodia's already serious inflation problem.

Although there is no sign of the starvation that once afflicted Cambodia,
international relief organizations say malnutrition is a constant concern.

The price of rice, the staple of the diet, has more than doubled over the last
year, to 55 cents a pound, equivalent to a day's wages for much of the
population, which is about seven million.

Potato Shortages in capital

There have been reports of potato shortages in Phnom Penh as foreigners buy up
the crop for their own meals. Families of beggars wait patiently outside many of
Phnom Penh's sparkling new restaurants and hotels.

"The foreigners complain about the prices of the food, but they always pay
them," said Un Chanphalla, who runs a vegetable stand in Cambodia's central
market. "The poor are not so lucky. They must go without."

While foreign businessmen are swarming into Phnom Penh, most of their
investments are made in services industries -- banking, restaurants, hotels and
the like -- and seem designed more to make a quick return on capital than to
contribute to the economic development of Cambodia.

To a degree that startles many Cambodians, the United Nations is now
administering much of the central Government, filling key posts at the Defense
and Foreign Ministries, and in the national police.

Prime Minister Hun Sen and his deputies, installed by Vietnam after its 1978
invasion, remain in place, although increasingly they must work alongside United
Nations officials, a requirement of the peace settlement.

A Daunting Assignment

"The United Nations has never done anything like this before," said Gerard
Porcell, an administrative-law judge from France who was recruited by the United
Nations for a daunting assignment -- administering the Cambodian Government in
advance of the election. "We cannot look over everyone's shoulder, but we are
attempting to have control."

Although diplomats had feared that the Hun Sen Government would refuse to give
up authority in sensitive ministries, Mr. Porcell has few public complaints of
lack of cooperation by the Government, although in some ministries there was
little left for the United Nations to run.

Outraged by corruption and by inadequate pay, experienced Government workers by
the hundreds have fled for private business in recent months, leaving the
Government to crumble from within.

"In some ministries, we have found almost nothing -- empty rooms," Mr. Porcell
said, shaking his head. "That was true especially in the Ministry of Defense.
There we found many empty rooms, many spiders and cobwebs."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The presence of the large United Nations force has produced in
many Cambodians a sense of relief, even of opportunity, although the settlement
is under threat of collapse because the Khmer Rouge refuses to disarm. A French
soldier in the United Nations force talked to residents of Kompong Som. (Jacques
Witt/Sipa Press) (pg. A5)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Phnom Penh. (pg. A5)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PARTY IN THE SPOTLIGHT: ON STAGE;
A Few Words, Texas-Style, Before 'the Rubber Hits the Road'

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 17


This Republican National Convention being deep in the heart of Texas, speakers
on the first night of the party's nominating session were trying to outdo each
other with clever, folksy metaphors and sayings.

Just about everyone tried their hand at it, even the delegates. One of the
delegates loyal to Patrick J. Buchanan, Bill Dearing, a 28-year-old lawyer from
Tennessee, said Mr. Buchanan's rivals for the mantle of conservative leadership
had "sold out like a bunch of kennel-fed dogs."

But the clear master of the evening was Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, who
has turned pungent soundbites into a cottage industry.

"This week," he said, "is where the rubber hits the road for our party."

Barely pausing to draw a breath, Mr. Simpson proclaimed that the Republicans
would "blow away all this warm hazy stuff of summer with the cool crisp winds of
fall" and the Democrats will "disappear like squash vines in the winter time."

And when the Republicans talk about Gov. Bill Clinton's draft record, Mr.
Simpson said, the Democrats will "holler like a gut-shot panther."

Quick to Compare Military Records

Indeed, Mr. Clinton's draft record seemed to be a favorite subject of the
evening. Mr. Bush has said he wants his campaign to avoid the "sleaze" business,
but tonight's speeches suggested that he draws the line at his opponent's family
life. Other subjects, like the draft, are fair game.

The aim, apparently, was to remind the delegates that Mr. Clinton had joined an
R.O.T.C. program and gone to study in England to remove himself from the draft,
while Mr. Bush flew a Navy torpedo-bomber in World War II.

"When Mr. Clinton's turn came in Vietnam, he sat up in a dormitory in Oxford,
England, and figured out how to dodge the draft," Mr. Buchanan said.

Mr. Simpson was even more direct. "We'll be talking about a man who quit school
to go to fight for his country and a man who went to school to avoid fighting
for it," he hollered.

It seemed that about the only politician here who was not talking about Mr.
Clinton's draft record was Vice President Dan Quayle, who has had his own
problems with the issue.

A Republican Version Of Ann Richards

Every convention, it seems, needs a colorful woman from Texas to run it. In New
York, at the Democratic National Convention, it was Ann W. Richards, the
Governor of Texas, who was voted temporary chairwoman of the gathering and said
some pithy and not very flattering things about George Bush and Dan Quayle.

In Houston, Kay Bailey Hutchison, the Texas Treasurer, is also the temporary
chairman. Her mission, it seemed, was the same as Ms. Richards's, only in
reverse.

Suggesting that Mr. Clinton had unrealistic views of the economy and just about
everything else, she proclaimed: "You know something? I think he really did
inhale."

At times, Ms. Hutchison seemed to be almost consciously imitating Ms. Richards,
who tormented Mr. Bush in 1988 by quipping that he was born "with a silver foot
in his mouth." She used the same oratorical cadence, held her head high and
stiff, just like the silver-haired Ms. Richards, and tried to turn her
Democratic colleague's own words on her.

"Poor Ann, she can't help it -- she was born with silver roots in her hair,"
said Ms. Hutchison, who has tinted blond hair.

Buchanan Supporters Keep an Eye on 1996

Mr. Buchanan declared in his speech tonight that the "the primaries are over"
and that he was behind Mr. Bush "all the way to a great comeback victory in
November."

His loyalists on the convention floor, who call themselves "The Buchanan
Brigade," made it clear that Nov. 3, Election Day, is where the unity ends.

Tonight they proclaimed Mr. Buchanan the early leader in the fight for the next
Republican Presidential nomination that turns in large part on the party's right
wing.

Vice President Dan Quayle, they insisted, is no competition. Mr. Buchanan is
"more of a leader than Dan Quayle," said Lester Firstenberger, 29, a lawyer from
Nashville.

His fellow delegate, Bill Dearing, said two other conservatives, William J.
Bennett, the former Education Secretary, and Jack F. Kemp Jr., the Housing
Secretary, had "sold out."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Study of Dioxin's Effect in Vietnam Is Hampered by Diplomatic Freeze

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 4; Science Desk; The Environment Page

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A 17-YEAR freeze in relations between Vietnam and the United States is hindering
vital research into the long-term effects of Agent Orange and other sources of
dioxin on both military and civilian populations, a New York scientist says.

"Where does this nasty stuff go, and how long does it persist?" said the
scientist, Dr. Arnold Schecter, a preventive-medicine specialist at the clinical
campus of the State University of New York's Health Sciences Center in
Binghamton. His research into dioxin began in 1981, when toxic contamination was
released in a transformer fire in a New York State office building in
Binghamton.

Three years later, Dr. Schecter went to Vietnam, convinced that he could learn
about the potential dangers of industrial dioxin in the West by studying the
people in areas sprayed during the Vietnam War with large doses of American
defoliants containing dioxin.

Every year, Dr. Schecter returns to Vietnam to collect tissue samples from
people who might have been exposed to dioxin. To do that, he must overcome the
bureaucratic and diplomatic hurdles caused by the lack of formal diplomatic
relations between Vietnam and the United States.

While Vietnamese and American officials move at a glacial pace in negotiations
to improve ties, time is running out for dioxin victims in Vietnam, he said in
an interview from Binghamton.

Dr. Schecter, who is constrained by an American embargo from using Federal funds
for his one-man research project, said that while numerous scientists are
studying dioxin in the United States and Europe, Vietnam is an ideal location
for more research into potential links between dioxin and cancer, reproductive
dysfunction, hormone problems, immune deficiencies, disorders of the central
nervous system, liver damage, diabetes and altered lipid metabolism.

Dioxin, which comes in several chemical forms, is an unwanted byproduct of the
manufacture of some agricultural and industrial compounds. Although dioxin is
known to cause cancer and birth defects in laboratory animals, its only proven
toxic effect in humans is chloracne, a skin disorder.

Dioxin is "ubiquitous and symbolic of industrialization," Dr. Schecter said,
adding that it was critical to determine the level at which it might become
dangerous to humans. In the United States and other industrial countries, Dr.
Schecter said, dioxin from certain industries and urban incinerators has begun
to appear in the food chain, in milk, meat and fish.

Dr. Ellen Silbergeld, a professor of toxicology at the University of Maryland
who has conducted research on dioxin for a number of years, said scientists
believed that Vietnam could provide excellent opportunities for study for two
reasons.

First, a large number of Vietnamese of all ages and both sexes have been exposed
to dioxin. In the West, high-dose industrial accidents or cases of neighborhood
contamination in Seveso, Italy; Times Beach, Mo., or Love Canal in Niagara
Falls, N.Y. -- have involved small groups in confined areas. In factories and
among veterans, most of those exposed have been men.

"We really need to understand the effects of dioxin on women," Dr. Silbergeld
said. "Dioxin is very toxic to the female reproductive system and the
development of the fetus. We do not have a group here to study. In Vietnam, many
women and children were exposed."

The second reason Vietnam is a good place to study is that it furnishes an
extensive control group. Dr. Schecter said Vietnamese from the north who were
not sprayed by defoliants made up a control group because they live in an area
with little industrialization, so they would not have a substantial exposure to
dioxin from any sources. To determine dioxin's effects, the health of the
control group can be compared to the health of those who were exposed to
defoliants in the central and southern regions during the Vietnam War.

Dr. Schecter said that 12 million to 20 million gallons of Agent Orange was
dumped on Vietnam from 1962 to 1970, when an outcry from scientists led
President Richard M. Nixon to order an end to the defoliation. Agent Orange --
the name came from the color of barrel markings -- was contaminated by low
levels of dioxin. It was a mixture of two herbicides, 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, which
contained the most toxic type of dioxin.

Many Vietnamese had substantial exposures to dioxin. "Eighty percent of the
Vietnamese lived in rural areas and were frequently barefoot or in sandals"
during the period when Agent Orange was sprayed, Dr. Schecter said, adding,
"Now, after a latency period of 20 to 30 years, we ought to start seeing an
excess of cancers if they are going to occur."

Dr. Schecter has built relations over the last eight years with Vietnamese
doctors. He sends specimens of Vietnamese tissue to dioxin chemists around the
world, asking them to help interpret them. He is being assisted by researchers
at the Harvard University Medical School and the Columbia University School of
Public Health.

"Cooperation in Vietnam couldn't be better," he said. "They have opened centers
around the country to help in joint research.

"If we don't go into Vietnam as soon as possible, we're letting a unique
opportunity fade," he said. "Although elevated levels of dioxin will be found
for decades, the presence slowly decreases. Older people are dying. People at
higher risk are dying. We are losing opportunities to study the health
consequences for all of us."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Arnold Schecter of the State University of New York's Health
Sciences Center in Binghamton studies effects of dioxin in Vietnam. (Michael
Okoniewski for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

What's Still Missing on M.I.A.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


The reason for all the theories that American prisoners of war remain alive in
Indochina, almost two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, now becomes
painfully clear. From 1973 on, official Washington misrepresented what it knew
and shrugged off new leads, betraying its obligations to the families of the
missing and to the public at large.

Even now, as a Senate select committee pursues its careful investigations, the
White House has yet to offer any explanation or apology for the deceptions of
Administrations past. The Vietnam syndrome cannot be declared properly buried
until the executive branch itself sets the record straight on those missing in
action, the M.I.A.'s.

It is too much to expect a resolution of every single case. That has not been
possible in any war, and too much time has now gone by.

But it's hard to justify the Nixon Administration's public closing of this issue
while the trail was still hot. In 1973, when Hanoi returned 591 American
prisoners of war, the Pentagon's own records showed that hundreds more Americans
had survived capture and were quite possibly still alive. Even so, the Nixon
Administration proclaimed that all prisoners had been returned, thus reducing
any incentive for Hanoi to pursue the remaining cases.  Some of the Americans
probably died in captivity. But others were held in Laos, possibly captured
while carrying out secret missions. And still others might have been held by
local authorities, without direct knowledge by Hanoi.

The Senate committee began piecing this story together several weeks ago. Last
week, former Reagan Administration officials offered additional evidence
suggesting that some captives may indeed have remained alive years after the
war. Ross Perot's long-awaited testimony, meanwhile, proved disappointingly
vague and unsubstantiated.

By careful comparison of government records, the committee continues to refine
its estimates of captives alive in 1973 -- more than 100, it now seems. It
pursues leads from the former Soviet Union. And it usefully presses Vietnam,
Laos and Cambodia to cooperate. Its efforts are likely to produce the first
credible accounting of M.I.A.'s since the war.

George Bush is not to blame for his predecessors' mishandling of the issue. But
he has in fact been closely involved with government decision-making in this
area for most of the 19 years since U.S. troops left Vietnam. The damaged
credibility of the executive branch requires the President to address the issue
himself.


LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Soldier of Fortune Magazine Held Liable for Killer's Ad

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Aug. 18


In a case that raised First Amendment issues, a Federal appeals court has upheld
a ruling that Soldier of Fortune magazine was liable in the contract murder of
an man whose killers were hired through a "sinister" and suggestive classified
advertisement in the magazine.

The 2-to-1 ruling by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th
Circuit, published Monday, upheld a $4.3 million damage award to the sons of the
victim, Richard Braun of suburban Atlanta.

A spokesman for Soldier of Fortune, Alex McColl, said today, "We're disappointed
and think that this decision is a hazard to the print media generally." He said
the magazine, which is based in Boulder, Colo., and has a circulation of 90,000,
had not decided whether to appeal the ruling further.

The case raised the question of whether commercial speech enjoys the nearly
absolute First Amendment protections accorded noncommercial and political
speech. It also highlighted what liability, if any, publishers have for harmful
events that are linked to items in their classified ad columns.

No Fear of a 'Chill'

The appeals panel found that publishers were liable "for compensatory damages
for negligently publishing a commercial advertisement where the ad on its face,
and without the need for investigation, makes it apparent that there is a
substantial danger of harm to the public."

The panel majority, Judges R. Lanier Anderson 3d and Joel F. Dubina, went on to
say that requiring publishers to examine advertisements against such a standard
did not amount to a significant burden that would "chill" protected commercial
free speech or hurt a publication's advertising revenues and thereby threaten
its existence and noncommercial free speech.

Judge Jesse E. Eschbach dissented.

Michael I. Meyerson, a University of Baltimore Law School professor who is an
expert in First Amendment cases, said the case might very well go to the Supreme
Court because the judges' decision conflicted with one last year by appellate
judges of the Fifth Circuit. That earlier case, in Texas, also involved a
Soldier of Fortune advertisement that resulted in a contract killing but the
judges there found that its language was too ambiguous to lead to the immediate
conclusion that the person was advertising services as a contract killer.

Mr. Meyerson disputed Mr. McColl's suggestion that the 11th Circuit decision
threatened commercial free speech by applying broadly to liability for
everything advertised from used cars to dates. He said that most court decisions
had long determined that publications were not the main guarantors of the truth
of their advertisements.

The current decision does not change that, Mr. Meyerson said, but merely
requires that a publication examine the language of an advertisement to
determine whether it is a threat to the public.

Noting that in the last 10 years more than a half-dozen cases of contract murder
have been linked to Soldier of Fortune, Mr. Meyerson said: "This decision says
that a publication with this history of criminal activity linked to its
advertisements has a duty to the public to try to make sure that such things
don't occur. And all they have to do is just look at the language of the
advertisement."

'All Jobs Considered'

The advertisement in question here was submitted in June 1985 by Michael Savage
of Knoxville, Tenn. It read: "GUN FOR HIRE: 37-year-old professional mercenary
desires jobs. Vietnam veteran. Discrete and very private. Body guard, courier,
and other special skills. All jobs considered." It gave two telephone numbers
and a mailing address.

Sometime in August 1985, Bruce Gastwirth and John H. Moore, business associates
of Mr. Braun, responded to the advertisement. Later that month Mr. Moore, Mr.
Savage and an associate of Mr. Savage, Sean T. Doutre, went to Mr. Braun's home,
where Mr. Doutre shot Mr. Braun to death as he was pulling out of his driveway.

In 1989 Mr. Moore, Mr. Gastwirth, Mr. Savage and Mr. Doutre were convicted on
Federal charges of conspiracy in the killing of Mr. Braun. Soon afterward, Mr.
Braun's sons, Michael, now 23, and Ian, 26, brought the civil suit against
Soldier of Fortune.

Testimony established that the advertisement brought Mr. Braun's killers and his
business associates together, and a Federal jury awarded the brothers $12.37
million. A judge reduced the amount to $4.37 million, and the current ruling was
in the magazine's appeal of that award.

The Brauns' lawyer, Steven Glassroth, said there had been two other civil suits
against Soldier of Fortune for advertisements of allegedly illegal services. One
of those cases was settled out of court, he said, and the other was the Texas
one in which the Fifth Circuit ruled that the advertisement was too ambiguous on
its face to constitute a threat.

The lawyer who represented Soldier of Fortune in its appeal here, Barrett
Prettyman, said today that he had argued that the language of Mr. Savage's
advertisement was similar to the one in the Texas case. That ad read:
"EX-MARINES -- 67-69 'Nam vets. Ex-DI, weapons specialist-jungle warfare, pilot,
M.E., high risk assignments, U.S. or overseas."

The 11th Circuit panel said, however, that while the advertisement in the Texas
case was "facially innocuous" and "ambiguous in its message," Mr. Savages's
advertisement "clearly conveyed that he was ready, willing and able to use his
gun to commit crimes."

"When the list of legitimate jobs -- i.e. body guard and courier -- is followed
by 'other special skills' and 'all jobs considered,' the implication is clear
that the advertiser would consider illegal jobs," the panel said. "The publisher
could recognize the offer of criminal activity as readily as its readers
obviously did."

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ousted Thai Leader Now Political Front-Runner

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 671 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 16


The scandal-tainted Thai Prime Minister ousted in a coup in 1991 has re-emerged
as a front-runner to lead Thailand's next civilian government, a political
rebirth that has dismayed many in the country's new democracy movement.

In a political system in which office-seekers are often compared to "ching
chok," or chameleons, and yesterday's enemy is today's devoted ally, perhaps no
one has changed colors so dramatically as Chatichai Choonhavan, the 70-year-old
former Prime Minister.

Mr. Chatichai has patched things up with Thai military leaders -- many of the
same men who toppled his Government in February 1991, forced him into temporary
exile and impounded his wealth -- and is being touted as a serious contender in
the election scheduled for Sept. 13.

His newly formed political party, Chat Pattana, or National Development Party,
has attracted a variety of discredited if still powerful and wealthy
politicians, many with close ties to the military.

'Most Visible Front-Runner'

An editorial in The Nation, an English-language Bangkok newspaper, said, "Chat
Pattana now appears to be the party to beat in the election while its leader,
Chatichai Choonhavan, is the most visible front-runner in the race for the
premiership."

The last Chatichai Government was seen by the public as so corrupt that the coup
was actually welcomed by many Thais who otherwise disapproved of the military's
interference.

After the coup, a investigating panel controlled by the junta determined that
Mr. Chatichai and several of his deputies had become "unusually rich" in office
and could not justify their vast assets. In Mr. Chatichai's case, more than $9
million in assets were seized. Mr. Chatichai has denied the corruption
allegations and has gone to court to appeal the ruling.

In seeking support for his new party, Mr. Chatichai has pointed to his record as
Prime Minister in promoting economic growth and in assisting Thailand's
impoverished neighbors, including Vietnam and Cambodia, through investment. For
several years, the Thai economy has been one of the world's fastest growing.

Leaders of the democracy movement fear that a new Chatichai government could
undo this year's dramatic progress in reforming Thai politics -- reform that
came at the cost of scores of lives in street clashes last May between democracy
protesters and armed soldiers.

The killings inflamed the Thai public and brought about the collapse of the
military-dominated Government that had succeeded Mr. Chatichai, and led as well
to the ouster of several senior army and air force leaders.

The caretaker Prime Minister now running the government, Anand Panyarachun, is
seen as one of the most capable and honest leaders in Thailand's history. But
Mr. Anand, a businessman and former diplomat who describes himself as a
"politician by accident," has insisted that he will step down after the election
next month.

Startled by Chatichai

While many in the democracy movement had hoped the election would put Thailand
on the road to a clean, civilian-controlled government, they have been startled
in recent weeks to see Mr. Chatichai re-emerge as a political power broker, with
a strong opportunity to become Prime Minister again.

Mr. Chatichai, a retired Army general, has called for a new, "constructive
dialogue" between the civilian government and the military, which many Thais
take as a signal that the military could regain much of the power it lost after
the crisis last May.

Four leading political parties have already pledged that they would not join
with Mr. Chatichai in whatever coalition government is formed after the
election.

"If we accept unusually rich ministers, our part will lose public faith," said
Chamlong Srimuang, founder of the Palang Dharma Party and the unofficial leader
of the nation's democracy movement. The Confederation for Democracy, an
organization that called the May street protests, has started a campaign against
Mr. Chatichai, describing him as "unfit" to lead a government.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.S. Says a Cambodian Ring Created Fake P.O.W. Photos

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 400 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 18


Senior Defense Department officials say that they have exposed a ring of
Cambodians who created and circulated at least six fraudulent photographs
intended to represent American prisoners of war still alive in Southeast Asia.

"We have identified the people involved and talked to them," said an official
who insisted on not being identified. "We know how they extracted the pictures
and processed them and sent them to a refugee camp in Thailand."

It has not been uncommon for Cambodian refugees in Thailand to offer such
pictures to the authorities, apparently in an effort to improve their chances of
being approved for resettlement in the United States.

Six pictures the Defense Department says were fraudulent surfaced last year,
some in multiple copies, at a Cambodian refugee camp known as Site 2, on the
Thai-Cambodian border. One of the pictures, showing three men purported to be
Americans, was widely reproduced in the American press.

Defense Department agents traced the pictures back to Phnom Penh, officials say,
where they "closed the loop" with the help of Soviet diplomats and Cambodian
researchers.

The officials say that the group of Cambodians, several of whom held Government
jobs but apparently were not acting in any official capacity, had routinely
scoured Soviet publications for faces that could pass as Western, and then
doctored those photographs.

Officials say that all six pictures appear to have been photographed from Soviet
magazines and retouched in a Phnom Penh photo studio.

Outside U.S. Jurisdiction

In five of the six cases, the officials said, the Cambodians attached what
seemed to be concocted American-sounding names to the faces in the photographs.
But the officials said that the sixth photo gave them particular trouble because
the Cambodian forgery ring seems to have obtained, through fliers circulated in
Southeast Asia, the pictures and names of three Americans actually listed as
missing: Col. John L. Robertson and Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. of the Air Force and
Lieut. Larry James Stevens of the Navy. The forgers then tried to doctor a
picture of three Soviet farmers to resemble those men, the officials say.

The Cambodians who are accused of having created fraudulent photographs cannot
be charged by the United States with criminal offenses because they are outside
American jurisdiction, Defense Department officials say.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 29, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 19 about photographs purporting
to show American prisoners of war still alive in Southeast Asia misstated a
detail about one of the prisoners, Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. Before the appearance
of the photographs, which the State Department considers fakes, no fliers with
genuine photographs of Major Lundy are known to have circulated in Southeast
Asia.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cut Off the Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


The stakes in Cambodia could scarcely be higher. The U.N.'s most ambitious
peace-building effort ever is challenged by a resurgent Pol Pot, still in
command of the genocidal Khmer Rouge. Agreed deadlines have come and gone, but
Khmer Rouge fighters refuse to turn in weapons or admit U.N. monitors into zones
they control. U.N. credibility and hundreds of thousands of Cambodian lives are
now at risk.

Fortunately, there's a practical solution. The international community has a
chance to cut off the Khmer Rouge from its main sources of guns and money in
Thailand.

Thailand and Vietnam have been the twin nemeses of Cambodian history, nibbling
at Cambodian sovereignty and territory at every opportunity. Now that Vietnam
has been driven back, the main danger comes from the Thai side, where border
commanders sponsor a mutually profitable commerce with the Khmer Rouge.

The main Khmer Rouge zone lies in western Cambodia. Its eastern boundary is
policed by the U.N. But a western back door is kept open by Thai commanders,
allowing both sides to profit from a booming trade in gems, lumber and antiques.

Without the revenues from this cross-border trade, Khmer Rouge ability to defy
U.N. agreements would be limited. Military supplies from China now appear to
have been cut off. Arms stockpiled before the peace agreement will not last
forever. If border trade were closed down, the Khmer Rouge would become
manageable within a reasonable time.

Officially, Thailand supports the U.N. peace operation. It even has troops
working in the U.N. zone. The trick, then, is to get Thailand's Prime Minister,
Anand Panyarachun, to force his regional commanders into line with official Thai
policy. With his support, the U.N. could install monitors at key points along
the border. Then, if the Khmer Rouge continued to defy the peace agreement, its
economic lifeline could be blocked.

Understandably, the Prime Minister, a caretaker due to leave office after
elections next month, hesitates to challenge politically powerful commanders.
But Mr. Anand owes his job to a popular revolt against top military commanders
three months ago. With strong popular support, he has loosened the military's
grip in other areas.

Further, Thailand's main foreign partners, the U.S., China and Japan, all have a
strong stake in a successful U.N. operation in Cambodia. Pressing Bangkok to let
U.N. monitors police the border would substantially raise the odds of success.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Who Won the Cold War?

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


Republican claims this week that they won the cold war prompt me to reveal an
off-the-record conversation I had with the Chief of the Soviet General Staff in
1983. Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov told me at that time -- before President Reagan's
increases in military spending fully took hold, six years before the Soviet
empire in Eastern Europe crumbled and eight years before the Soviet Union itself
collapsed -- that the cold war was already essentially over, if not finally won
by the West.

I had known the beribboned marshal for years, when I was a Government official
and a correspondent. He was always brilliant, plain-spoken and hard-line. We
talked on a wintry March afternoon, just days after Mr. Reagan's speech aptly
described the Soviet Union as "an evil empire."

I began that afternoon by attacking Moscow for amassing forces that far exceeded
defensive needs. He waved me off with a tolerant smile. Then he proceeded to
make the most astonishing argument I had ever heard from a Soviet official.

Numbers of troops and weapons mean little, he said. We cannot equal the quality
of U.S. arms for a generation or two. Modern military power is based upon
technology, and technology is based upon computers.

In the U.S., he continued, small children -- even before they begin school --
play with computers. Computers are everywhere in America. Here, we don't even
have computers in every office of the Defense Ministry. And for reasons you know
well, we cannot make computers widely available in our society.

Then came his portentous punch line: We will never be able to catch up with you
in modern arms until we have an economic revolution. And the question is whether
we can have an economic revolution without a political revolution.

In so many words, Marshal Ogarkov was acknowledging that the Communist system
was not working and could not work. He was saying, in effect, that the Soviet
Union without radical change was incapable of competing with the U.S.

Less than a year after our conversation, the "authorities" mysteriously removed
Marshal Ogarkov from his high office -- without explanation. Several years
later, the marshal's volcanic logic was to be resurrected publicly by Mikhail
Gorbachev as he launched perestroika and glasnost.

Honest historians and politicians will honestly contend over exactly who won the
cold war and how. But the following propositions seem to me to be roughly true:

* The Soviets lost the cold war because of the rot of the Communist system far
more than we won it by the policy of containing Soviet power.

* Containment was an essential ingredient, and Democrats created that policy and
promoted it as fervently as Republicans. After the Vietnam War, however,
Democrats emphasized diplomatic and economic means over military power, and
Republicans stressed the reverse. True, many liberal Democrats naively believed
Moscow could be loved into good behavior. As true, many conservative Republicans
exaggerated Soviet might and espoused confrontations that could have provoked
war.

* In combating Soviet thrusts abroad, Democrats approved aid to the Afghan
mujahedeen fighting Soviet troops as solidly as Republicans did. Many Democrats
hesitated about aid to Angolan rebels because they seemed as bad as their
Communist opponents. Republicans demanded arms for the Nicaraguan contras, but
most Democrats resisted aid without serious negotiating efforts, a position
President Bush ultimately adopted.

* The Reagan military buildup, backed by a minority of Democrats, certainly
added to Soviet economic woes and probably speeded up Communism's demise. Most
Democrats, however, felt and feel that whatever was gained by this course was
far outweighed by costs to the American economy and domestic priorities.

The shameless distortion of this record by Republicans in Houston can be
partially pardoned as politics. Unpardonable is their continuing blindness to
the principal lesson of the cold war -- the Soviet empire collapsed abroad
because it had failed at home.

Thus Republicans in Houston still seem more interested in praising themselves
unduly for slaying an already dying Red Dragon than in preparing to restore an
America they virtually ignored for 12 years.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: On Stage;
In G.O.P.'s History of Wars, The Candidates' Roles Grow

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 19


Nominating conventions, it is said, are moments for a candidate to make history.
They can also be moments for rewriting history, in this case military history.

So, exit Lieut. (j.g.) George H. W. Bush, World War II bomber pilot. Enter
President Bush, Top Gun.

Mr. Bush's war record has undergone a subtle change at the convention, where
speaker after speaker has told the audience that Mr. Bush was a brave fighter
pilot. In fact, he was a brave torpedo-bomber pilot, who was shot down, his plan
crashing into the Pacific Ocean.

It is not clear why this laudatory record needed revision. Perhaps being a
fighter pilot, going mano a mano with Hirohito's Zeroes, is a more alluring
image.

Perhaps the Republicans simply got confused about the types of aircraft,
although they could have consulted Senator John McCain, the Republican of
Arizona, a marine pilot who was shot down in Vietnam and held prisoner for seven
years.

Whatever the reason, military confusion was rampant.

Dan Quayle, who served in the National Guard and did not go to Vietnam, was
served up as the antithesis of Gov. Bill Clinton, who went to study in England
and did not go to Vietnam.

"Remember," said his wife, Marilyn, speaking on family values night, "not
everyone joined the counterculture. Not everyone demonstrated, dropped out, took
drugs, joined in the sexual revolution or dodged the draft."

Mrs. Quayle spoke from a revised text. The original had said, "or fled to
Canada." Mr. Clinton says he did not dodge the draft. The Republicans say he
did. There is no question that he did not go to Canada.

Wilson by Satellite



"Gov. Pete Wilson's convention speech" or "How to Upstage Your Rivals for the
1996 Nomination Without Really Being There."

Mr. Wilson, who is one of a half-dozen or so Republican hopefuls for the next
Presidential election, had to beg off from the convention because of his battle
over adoption of a California budget. It was a politically necessary decision.

But it also left the limelight to his rivals: Mr. Quayle, Patrick J. Buchanan,
Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, Housing Secretary Jack Kemp Jr., to name a few.

So Mr. Wilson's staff booked time on a satellite, keeping an eye on the clock as
the evening's other speakers talked.

Then, at the appointed hour, they threw Mr. Wilson's face onto the huge speakers
in the hall and the California delegates began cheering.

As Mr. Wilson spoke, they clapped loudly. They waved their signs (which said
"Pete!") and their hats (which were Day-Glo green). They even obligingly chanted
"The Democrats" as Mr. Wilson recited political evils and asked who was
responsible for them.

A Real Celebrity

President Gerald Ford's Secret Service agents grew tense. A mob of delegates and
reporters surged in his direction. They meant business. The agents braced for
action.

Then the crowd swept past Mr. Ford, oblivious to his presence, and closed in on
the real celebrity.

It was Arnold Schwarzenegger, who went to New Hampshire with his pal the
President for the February primary and did something that took real strength. He
uttered the name that Mr. Bush would not: Patrick J. Buchanan.

Tonight, "The Terminator" was merely here to lend moral support, and the
Republicans were delighted. Well, most of them.

"Gee, I think he dyes his hair," said a delegate from Montana. "I thought it was
like Dan Quayle's."

Elect Barbara Bush


 The cost of living index, according to the Rev. Pat Robertson: "Our families
spend more to support wasteful government than the serfs did in the Middle
Ages."

And Mr. Robertson's idea of a political endorsement for Mr. Bush: "I don't care
what the polls say. Nobody can convince me that the American people are so blind
that they would want to replace Barbara Bush as First Lady."

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 21, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article from the Republican National Convention yesterday, under the
subheading "On Stage," about President Bush's military record, misstated the
military record of Senator John S. McCain of Arizona. He was a Navy aviator.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA AND THE MESSAGE: The Vice President;
Vice President Sees This Race as Chance to Recast Image

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 19


The country's first exposure to Dan Quayle's home town in 1988 was not exactly
what the Vice President had in mind. Rather than seeing Huntington, Ind., as an
idyllic town in the heartland, television viewers saw an angry mob of locals on
the courthouse green, heckling the reporters who were interrogating Mr. Quayle
about his enlistment in the Indiana National Guard.

Four years later, Mr. Quayle will try again, this time with a nostalgic video
intended to introduce him to the Republican National Convention on Thursday
night and to reintroduce him to an electorate that still views him in largely
unfavorable terms. The four-minute video is just one component of the
full-throttle campaign waged by Mr. Quayle and his aides during convention week
to redefine him as a man of courage, conviction and, perhaps most important,
common beginnings.

Huntington, Indiana, is probably the most perfect small town, U.S.A., you could
find," says Mr. Quayle's younger brother, Michael, narrating over images of
Little League baseball, riverbank fishing and the two-bedroom house where he and
Mr. Quayle grew up.

Young Golfer

Next comes black-and-white home movie segments of Mr. Quayle as a toddling
youngster, swinging a tiny golf club but missing the ball. Later he struggles to
stand on his roller skates as his mother, Corinne, describes the scene as a
metaphor for her son's persistence.

The Democrats used videos to introduce both of their candidates at their
convention last month. But the Quayle film, produced by Michael Murphy, a
Washington media consultant, seemed most like the film about Gov. Bill Clinton,
which included archival footage of the formative political moment of Mr.
Clinton's youth -- his handshake with President John F. Kennedy.

But there is at least one marked contrast with the Clinton video -- the
portrayal of Dan and Marilyn Quayle's brief courtship. As the film jumps back
and forth between Mr. and Mrs. Quayle, creating the effect that they can
complete each other's sentences, the couple makes it clear that it was Mr.
Quayle who was in pursuit of a reluctant law student, Marilyn Tucker. The
Clinton film also depicted a law school romance, but in that case it was Hillary
Rodham who made the first advance after she caught Bill Clinton staring at her.

Recent polls show that Mr. Quayle's current approval ratings are the lowest and
that his disapproval ratings are the highest of any Vice President in 40 years.
Knowing that they have much to overcome, and that this convention and next
month's Vice-Presidential debate provide their best opportunities before 1996,
Mr. Quayle and his top aides have shown little subtlety in their crusade to
remake the Vice President's image.

They have orchestrated a round of high-profile testimonials to Mr. Quayle and
they arrived in Houston with folders filled with trivial facts about Mr. Quayle,
"talking points" that are intended to chip away at Mr. Quayle's image as a child
of privilege.

"Did you know that he had a great-grandfather who came from the British Isles in
the 1850's and worked as a railroad laborer in Chicago?" Jeffrey Nesbit, Mr.
Quayle's communications director, asked a reporter. "That his other
great-grandfather was a minister and circuit rider in Kansas and that his
grandfather was born in a dugout canoe? He says his most memorable vacation was
a 1961 trip to Yellowstone in a Rambler station wagon."

Although early stories in 1988 reported that Mr. Quayle was worth $600 million,
the Vice President's press secretary, David Beckwith, said Mr. Quayle's actual
net worth is about $1 million. The family's publishing fortune, now worth nearly
$1 billion, was placed in a trust by Mr. Quayle's maternal grandfather, Eugene
C. Pulliam, who ordered that it be divided among his great-grandchildren, Mr.
Beckwith said. So it will be Mr. Quayle's three children and their scores of
cousins who eventually divide the money.

Despite his hopes for a new beginning, Mr. Quayle is still dogged by questions
about his Vietnam-era military service. Asked today in an NBC interview whether
his decision to join the National Guard differed significantly from Mr.
Clinton's avoidance of the draft, Mr. Quayle said it did.

"I wore the uniform for six years," Mr. Quayle said. "I chose to serve my
country. Bill Clinton chose not to. It's a major difference between Bill Clinton
and myself. Joining the National Guard was an honorable decision."

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll" -- Graph shows response to
question "Is your opinion of Dan Quayle favorable, not favorable, undecided or
haven't you heard enough about Dan Quayle yet to have an opinion?," Aug.
1988-Aug. 1992. (Based on 24 nationwide telephone polls with registered voters
conducted by The New York Times and CBS News)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: CAMPAIGN TACTICS;
G.O.P.'s Young Confrontation Corps

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 4; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 20


In a long, gray concrete room off to the side of the Astrodome, a couple hundred
attractive young men and and women, members of the Republican Youth Coalition,
sat on folding chairs and accepted the praise of a grateful party elder.

"I want to tell you all that you have really done wonderfully," said Jeanie
Austin, a co-chairwoman of the Republican National Committee. "You have really
kept us in the news this week. I saw you take on the other side's rally the
other day and that was great. We're really proud of you."

The young people laughed and cheered.

Disruption of Press Session

Ms. Austin was referring to the organized disruption by about 100 young
Republicans of a Democratic news conference held in a Houston restaurant on
Tuesday. While the Democratic national chairman, Ronald H. Brown, and other
party officials tried to speak inside a glass-walled porch at Pappadeux
Restaurant, the group pounded on the windows, shouted, and waved signs that read
"Family Rights Forever. Gay Rights Never" and "Inhale This!"

Speaking to a reporter afterward, Ms. Austin acknowledged the disruption had
been sanctioned by the Republican Youth Coalition, which is controlled by the
College Republican National Committee, an arm of the Republican National
Committee. "There was going to be a big press conference by the other side, and
the young people heard about it, so they went over it and became, let us say,
part of it," she said. "That was good."

When it was suggested that the Democrats regarded the disruption as an exercise
in physical intimidation and a violation of basic rights and civil behavior, Ms.
Austin said: "The other side complains of everything we do. And we're getting
sick and tired of it. If they want to run a positive campaign, we're willing to
do so. If they want to slug it out, we're willing to do that too."

George Fondren, the College Republican National Committee's field director, also
defended the disruption. "If the Democrats are going to come to the Republican
National Committee and try to steal media attention, they should expect a little
confrontation," he said.

Politics and 'Garbage'

One member of the youth coalition, Nathaniel Parker, a 21-year-old student at
the University of Dallas, wearing a blue blazer and neatly knotted tie, said:
"Yeah, we don't take that garbage. They come to our turf, that's what they get."

A political convention is more than a gathering of people or a collection of
speeches or a planning session for a party's future. It is also a sort of
magnifying glass, gathering and focusing the varied rays of emotion within the
party into a focused mood. In this week's convention, that mood, sharpened a bit
more every day, was one with a deep undercurrent of anger.

That mood was on display in the AstroArena, a great hall next door to the
Astrodome that was renamed the American Spirit Pavilion during the convention.

Among the buttons and stickers for sale at the pavilion were some that
proclaimed: "Adulterers for Clinton," "Smile if You've Had an Affair with Bill
Clinton," as well as a cartoon of Mr. Clinton with a liar's long nose and his
face covered with lipstick prints.

Or, for $5, one can buy a mock movie poster, which purports to advertise "Slick
Willie: One Man's Story of Saying Whatever It Takes To Get Elected," starring
"Mario Cuomo as "The Godfather," and "Ted Kennedy as His Chaperone." The poster
also promises special appearances by "Hispanic Lesbians Against Racism," the
"University of Arkansas ROTC Unit" and the "Committee to Save the Gay Whales."
The tag line: "Don't Miss the Sequel -- Girls, Girls, Girls!"

Some of the best-selling T-shirts are several that take off on a routine made
famous by David Letterman, the late-night television host whose wit has always
depended on a bullet of cruelty.

There is the "Top 10 Reasons Why Democrats Are Losers," ("Think Ted Kennedy was
innocent at Chappaquiddick," "It takes a loser to like a loser") and the "Top 10
reasons why Bill Clinton is a loser" ("Vietnam: where was Bill? Grazing on
liberal fodder at Oxford" and "I didn't inhale").

"Oh, I love these!" said Amy Dorsett, 19, of San Antonio, a member of the youth
coalition, as she read the lines to a passerby.

In contrast to the 1964 convention, in which the party was torn apart by the
conflict between the philosophies of Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona and Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York, the hard feelings in this convention are all
directed toward outsiders, be they the press, the liberals or Mr. Clinton.

But the anger, and the willingness to act on it, is by no means limited to the
young.

Nina Totenberg, the National Public Radio correspondent who has become a villain
among conservatives for disclosing Anita F. Hill's accusations of sexual
harassment against Clarence Thomas during his confirmation hearings for the
Supreme Court, found herself on Wednesday night being followed on the floor of
the convention by young men who interrupted her work by repeatedly yelling:
"Nina, Nina. Have you had an affair."

The harassment looked spontaneous to Ms. Totenberg. But Pat Mullins, the
Republican chairman of Fairfax County who is a leader of the Virginia
delegation, said, "Oh, that is very deliberately done." He said he had arranged
the harassment of Ms. Totenberg because she had asked President Bush at a news
conference at his summer home in Maine whether he had an affair with a former
aide.

Informed that the question had been asked by Mary Tillotson, a reporter for CNN,
Mr. Mullins said: "Oh. Are you sure. I could have sworn I read something about
her asking it."

Shortly before this evening's session, a group of coalition members marched
through an adjacent building assigned to the press, chanting: "Tell the truth!
No more lies." Roger Stone, a Republican consultant who rose in the party as
part of the attack-oriented generation of Lee Atwater, happened to be walking
beside the marchers. As he passed a reporter, Mr. Stone gestured toward the
marchers. "Hitler Youth," he murmured under his breath.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Iran-Contra Judge Proves to Be a Master of Control

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20


Early in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George, Federal District Judge Royce
C. Lamberth displayed the kind of temperament he is known to deploy skillfully
in controlling a trial.

Mr. George, a former top Central Intelligence Agency official, is charged with
concealing the agency's role in the Iran-contra affair, and the trial has
involved mountains of classified material. Similar cases have foundered when
intelligence agencies blocked and delayed the release of documents.

When the same kind of delays began to develop in the George case, Judge Lamberth
quickly sought to cut through the mystery of why.

"I want the name of the person responsible," he said angrily to Government's
lawyers. "I want some accountability here."

Within a few hours, the prosecutors reported that the person responsible for the
delay was a National Security Agency lawyer, Peter Badger. The hapless Mr.
Badger was obliged to explain, saying he went to the dentist one day and
attended his son's graduation from a military program on another.

Members of the intelligence community were stunned at how quickly Judge Lamberth
stripped away the cloak of anonymity they so cherish, and they suggested that
what he did was unfair. But the delays ceased.

Navigating a Tricky Channel

Mr. George is the highest-ranking C.I.A. official to be tried in the Iran-contra
affair, and his trial has been the latest testing ground of a complicated law
designed to allow trials to proceed when sensitive information is involved. The
law, the Classified Information Procedures Act, was intended to counter the
technique known as "graymail," in which lawyers assert that in order to mount a
complete defense they must use documents with a confidentiality so vital that
the Government would rather drop the charges than give up the papers.

Other Federal judges trying cases arising from the Iran-contra affair have found
dealing with the law to be a tricky business. One prosecution was dropped, and
major charges were dismissed in other cases, including the one against Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North, a White House aide at the heart of the Iran-contra matter.

Judge Lamberth seems to have successfully navigated his way through the issues,
forging compromises between the intelligence agencies and the defense.

The incident about the classified materials also demonstrated how the judge uses
his demeanor on the bench to great effect. A large and hearty sort, he usually
projects a warm presence. But he can go from jovial to judicially menacing in a
microsecond, and lawyers say he is a commanding presence.

Last week, Judge Lamberth reached for his gavel in anger for the first time in
the trial to scold Mr. George for repeatedly disobeying his injunctions not to
interrupt the prosecutor, Craig A. Gillen.

Mr. George, who once commanded thousands of case officers and the agents they
recruited, controlled a budget of millions of dollars and dealt in the nation's
secrets, looked stricken and abashed as he listened to the judge's lecture.

From Vietnam to Washington

Royce Charles Lamberth was born in San Antonio on July 16, 1943, and as the son
of the chief of the motor pool he later spent many hours at nearby Kelly Air
Force Base. Coincidentally, Kelly would be the staging area for the C.I.A.'s
shipment of arms to the contras in Nicaragua decades later.

Judge Lamberth attended the University of Texas and its law school and was an
army captain in Vietnam, trying courts-martial at bases in combat areas.

When he left the service in 1974, he joined the United States Attorney's office
in Washington, and in that job, he often defended the C.I.A. in court.

Although an unabashed conservative Republican, Judge Lamberth is widely
respected and admired by some of his liberal adversaries of those days. John G.
Shattuck, who was the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, was
frequently on the other side of national security cases. Now a vice president at
Harvard University, Mr. Shattuck described the judge as a "vigorous but
exceptionally fair-minded opponent."

Representing a President

While a Government lawyer, Judge Lamberth defended the Army and the C.I.A. when
they were sued by Americans in West Germany who contended they were illegally
spied upon by the intelligence services. The suit was settled with Mr. Shattuck
and Mr. Lamberth forging new rules for the intelligence agencies in dealing with
Americans abroad.

As chief of the civil division in the United States Attorney's office, Judge
Lamberth represented President Jimmy Carter when Mr. Carter tried to prevent
Iranians from demonstrating in front of the White House during the hostage
ordeal. In an interview, the judge recalled how he was widely criticized by many
liberal lawyers in the Carter Administration for taking that position.

"On the other hand," he said dryly, "it didn't hurt my career to have angered
those people when the Reagan Administration took office."

Mr. Reagan named him to the bench in 1987, and Judge Lamberth has earned high
marks from lawyers surveyed in the Almanac of the Federal Judiciary. The almanac
prints the evaluations of lawyers anonymously, and their comments on judges can
be brutally candid. Some judges are described as "awful" and "irrational," but
Judge Lamberth is called scholarly, gentlemanly and one who "handles cases with
great skill."

Bright Side of Heavy Load

Judge Lamberth is among the Federal judges who have complained about the
increasing number of drug cases they are obliged to handle. But his annoyance is
tempered by the fact that like many judges in Washington he often deals with
interesting issues. After the George trial, Judge Lamberth will deal with a
collective-bargaining suit involving the National Football League.

Shortly after he became a judge, he dismayed many of his conservative friends by
ruling that Congress could not force the District of Columbia to repeal a
gay-rights measure.

"It didn't make me the most popular person for Christmas invitations that year,"
Judge Lamberth said. "But so be it."

NAME: Royce C. Lamberth

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Federal District Judge Royce C. Lamberth in his chambers in
Washington before charging the jury in the Iran-contra trial of Clair E. George.
(George Tames for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tuk Meas Journal;
Age-Old Hatreds Haunt Vietnamese in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: TUK MEAS, Cambodia


Um Tral's last mistake was to sing a song in Vietnamese.

Neighbors in this hamlet near Cambodia's southern border with Vietnam say Mr. Um
Tral's boisterous singing was overheard by a gang of perhaps 25 Cambodian
soldiers. In an anti-Vietnamese rage that many Cambodians insist is for them
almost instintive, the soldiers attacked with knives and guns, screaming,
"Destroy the Vietnamese enemy!"

Mr. Um Tral, 38 years old, was eviscerated in the July 21 attack. Four of his
nieces and nephews, ranging from 7 to 16 years old, were shot dead at
point-blank range. A young Vietnamese couple living a few hundred feet away were
also slain, along with their 7-day-old son. The killers have not yet been
identified.

In Cambodia's large Vietnamese community, there is a mounting fear that what
happened in Tuk Meas signaled the revival of an ancient Cambodian hatred that
over the centuries has led repeatedly to slaughter and to exile.

Fears Are Well Founded

More than 200,000 Vietnamese are believed to be in Cambodia, many of whose
families have lived here for generations, others who streamed across the border
from Vietnam in recent months after the settlement of the Cambodian civil war.

United Nations officials monitoring the peace say the fears of the Vietnamese
are well founded. There have been recent reports of other Vietnamese killed in
Cambodia for reasons of ethnic hatred. There are accounts of a massacre of as
many as nine Vietnamese in a small fishing village on the Tonle Sap River last
spring.

"It is very dangerous to be Vietnamese," said Num Lieng, 42, the mother of the
four children slain in Tuk Meas.

"I was born in Cambodia," said Mrs. Num Lieng, whose grief, she explained, had
now been overtaken by a kind of numbness. "I have always considered myself
Cambodian. But because my mother was Vietnamese, my family is sometimes treated
like an enemy."

She clutched a photo album of her slain children in her left hand as she cradled
her infant son, one of her two surviving children, with her right arm. She and
the baby were visiting her husband, a migrant house painter working several
miles away, when the massacre took place.

The killings horrified Mrs. Num Lieng's immediate neighbors, but not all the
Cambodians living nearby.

"I do not feel sad about the killings of Vietnamese," said Vong Tes, 86, whose
home is a few minutes' walk from the scene of the massacre and who heard the
screams. "The Vietnamese people have bad character.  They drink and they steal
and make nonsense. All the Vietnamese should leave Cambodia."

The hostility between Cambodians and Vietnamese predates recorded history.
Cambodians acknowledge that their hatred is more pronounced, the result of
centuries of invasions by their much more populous, more powerful neighbor to
the east. Today there are about 7 million Cambodians and 70 million Vietnamese.

The last Vietnamese invasion came in 1978 and ended the genocidal four-year
reign of the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas responsible for the
deaths of at least several hundred thousand and possibly more than one million
Cambodians.

Few here are surprised that 14 years later the Khmer Rouge is trying to stir up
a new wave of hatred against the Vietnamese, using radio broadcasts heard across
much of the countryside.

U.N. Assurances Demanded

The Khmer Rouge, which signed the peace treaty last year, is refusing to disarm
until it receives assurances from the United Nations that there are no
Vietnamese soldiers left in Cambodia. The demand has won it support from many
Cambodians.

Yasushi Akashi, the Japanese diplomat in charge of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, has repeatedly denounced anti-Vietnamese
discrimination and has worried publicly that what happened in Tuk Meas could be
repeated elsewhere. The massacre "is not unconnected with a general atmosphere
which exists in Cambodia," Mr. Akashi said in an interview. "There's a distinct
possibility of a recurrence of these racial incidents."

At the same time, the United Nations has offered assurances intended to entice
the Khmer Rouge leaders back to the peace operation, even if there is the
perception that the assurances undermine the interests of Vietnamese.

This month, Mr. Akashi announced election rules that could disenfranchise
thousands of ethnic Vietnamese by requiring voters to prove that they were born
here and have a Cambodian-born parent or, if they were born elsewhere, that they
have both a Cambodian-born parent and grandparent.

'Afraid for My Safety'

Khmer Rouge leaders say that Mr. Akashi's plan still does not go far enough to
prevent Vietnamese from voting in a Cambodian election.

As she tried to nurse her crying infant, Ms. Num Lieng explained that she could
not be concerned with concepts as abstract as electoral law or voting rights or
the details of the peace settlement in Cambodia, the nation that until now she
has always considered her home.

"Now like all Vietnamese, I am afraid for my safety in Cambodia," she said,
gently brushing back the baby's fine hair. "My children are dead. Maybe I will
die next."

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hatred of the Vietnamese by Cambodians predates history and is
now so developed that it is almost instinctive. Num Lieng, whose mother was
Vietnamese, returned to her village in Cambodia to find four of her children
slain. She holds one who survived and a photo album of the other four. (Philip
Shenon/The New York Times)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Tuk Meas.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

REPUBLICANS IN HOUSTON - MAN IN THE NEWS;
A Vice President Who Has Been Tested: James Danforth Quayle 3d

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 3; National Desk; The Convention

LENGTH: 1797 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 20


Patrick J. Buchanan was about to deliver his most memorable zinger, the line
about how Gov. Bill Clinton "sat up in a dormitory in Oxford, England, and
figured out how to dodge the draft." An impish producer at NBC News, who had an
advance text of Mr. Buchanan's Monday night speech to the Republican convention,
ordered the cameras trained on Vice President Dan Quayle.

As the Astrodome crowd erupted in cheers, Mr. Quayle sat stiff and
expressionless, his eyes shifting self-consciously to the left and then to the
right. The camera lingered. Mr. Quayle, whose own candidacy was bombarded by
questions about the draft four years earlier, did not smile.

Even as Mr. Quayle wages an aggressive campaign to reintroduce himself to the
electorate, the old demons, it seems, are always lurking.

This time it happened on a night when both President Bush and former President
Ronald Reagan went out of their way to bolster Mr. Quayle's promise of a "new
Dan Quayle," portraying him as a leader who has been severely tested. Mr. Reagan
called him "someone who has repeatedly stood up for his deepest convictions."
Mr. Bush added, "This guy stood there in the face of those unfair critics and he
has never wavered."

Moving Forward, Sliding Back

Indeed, Mr. Quayle has been tested unlike virtually any other American
politician, forced to spend four years chipping away at the devastating
caricature created in the first week of his 1988 campaign. And yet, each time
Mr. Quayle has given the country reason to take him seriously, he has said
something, done something or spelled something that instantly reversed the
progress and fed the stereotype.

In June, just as he was riding a public relations boost provided by a favorable
series of articles in The Washington Post, he made one of the most embarrassing
goofs of his tenure by misspelling the word "potato" at a grade school spelling
bee.

And misfortune struck twice this week, producing smirking headlines. First he
confused the year of the next Presidential election. "Let us see George Bush
re-elected this November and then we'll talk about 1994," he said in a CNN
interview on Tuesday. Then he misspoke in a speech Wednesday about term limits.
"This is not a bipartisan issue because Democrats, Republicans and independents
support term limitations," he said.

Each time it happens, Mr. Quayle's aides and allies wince at the prospect of
lost momentum. "It just seems that whenever he gets his head above water and
gets a couple of breaths of air, the next wave comes crashing down on him," said
Senator Daniel R. Coats, a former aide to Mr. Quayle who succeeded him as
Indiana's Republican junior Senator.

A Risk-Taking Activist

Although he is now 45 years of age, with a wisp of gray at his temples and
crow's feet at the corners of his gleaming blue eyes, Mr. Quayle still has an
unmarked look that cartoonists exploit to suggest an inner vacuity.

The Vice President says he has been as loyal to Mr. Bush as Mr. Bush was to Mr.
Reagan. But unlike Vice President Bush, Vice President Quayle has been an
aggressive, risk-taking activist, knowing he can only overcome his reputation
for buffoonery by 1996 if he establishes a serious record of his own.

To that end, he has become the Bush Administration's lead emissary to the
Republican right. He has converted his office into a war room for the
Administration's battle against government regulation, transforming the Council
on Competitiveness, which he heads, into a policy-making body that is both
respected and feared.

He has become inseparably identified with the Republican crusade on "family
values." But unlike former Education Secretary William J. Bennett, who defined
family values in cogent and specific terms when he nominated Mr. Quayle on
Wednesday night, the Vice President's oratory on the issue rarely moves beyond
platitudes about "hard work, integrity and personal responsibility."

Some Notes of Vitality

For much of the time in the last few months, Mr. Quayle and his coterie of
neoconservative aides injected one of the few notes of vitality into the
Bush-Quayle campaign. Before the convention, at least, they formed an
independent power base within the White House, often acting without the
knowledge or approval of Mr. Bush or his handlers, and often making the
President look drowsy by comparison.

And yet, Mr. Quayle's public approval ratings have continued to slide to an
all-time low. As the Bush-Quayle campaign floundered last month, Mr. Quayle
became a natural scapegoat. Even those who argued for keeping him on the ticket
rarely did so by cataloguing his political strengths.

The perception of the Vice President as a bumbler limits his effectiveness in
the campaign. When he assails the Democratic ticket, for example, aides to Mr.
Clinton dismiss his message by ridiculing the messenger.

1988 Convention Scrutiny

Mr. Quayle spent this week racing through a frantic schedule of 20 public
appearances, as against four by Mr. Bush, all intended to highlight the
attributes that were so thoroughly obscured at the 1988 convention by stories
about his enlistment in the Indiana National Guard instead of being drafted or
volunteering for active duty in the Vietnam War, even though he personally
approved American involvement in that war. He was also subjected to intense
scrutiny of his mediocre academic record and his family's wealth.

After four years Mr. Quayle can justifiably add at least one meaningful line to
his political resume: He is a survivor. Republican leaders maintain that even
Richard M. Nixon did not suffer the level of attack by journalists and comedians
that Mr. Quayle has endured. And unlike the former President, Mr. Quayle has
shown remarkable resilience without public displays of either bitterness or
vengeance.

"I'm sure he's learned what hell is," said Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican
of Wyoming. "He's been bombarded with more stuff than anybody I've known since I
came to Washington, and I admire the way he's taken the heat."

Chance to Prove Himself

Like a jujitsu master, Mr. Quayle has learned to turn his disadvantages into
advantages. Rather than indulging the politician's instinct for denial, he
concedes that he is the object of ridicule, and then argues that this has given
him the chance to prove himself in battle, in Washington if not in Vietnam.

"I stand before you and before the American people -- unbowed, unbroken and
ready to keep fighting for our beliefs," Mr. Quayle said in his acceptance
speech tonight.

In rebutting his critics, Mr. Quayle has constructed a demonology of evildoers,
ranging from the news media to the American Bar Association, who he maintains
are responsible for the deterioration of the economy, the family and his own
reputation. The argument sells well with conservative Republicans, who readily
embrace Mr. Quayle's contention that an offense to one is an offense to all.

"The elites laughed at the reference to Murphy Brown and sneered at my defense
of basic values," Mr. Quayle said on Monday in a speech to Pat Robertson's
Christian Coalition. "But it wasn't just me they were laughing at, my friends.
It was you and your families and your values."

Inherent in the case made by Mr. Quayle and his allies is the view that few of
his wounds have been self-inflicted. Mr. Quayle's wife, Marilyn, blames the
press for his problems.

"There was a great deal invested in Dan Quayle's being portrayed as someone out
of nowhere, that he was a lightweight, instead of really looking at his Senate
career and what he'd accomplished there," Mrs. Quayle said last week in an
interview at the Vice-Presidential residence in Washington. "His Senate record
is far more substantive in real accomplishment and creativity than Al Gore's is,
but you don't hear that because we never played the stroke-the-media bit."

Childhood in Two States

James Danforth Quayle 3d was born in Indianapolis on Feb. 4, 1947, the eldest of
the four children of James C. and Corinne Pulliam Quayle. Mr. Quayle's maternal
grandfather was Eugene C. Pulliam, whose publishing organization included
conservative newspapers in Indiana and Arizona.

Mr. Quayle divided his childhood in those two states. He received a B.A. degree
from DePauw University and a law degree from the Indiana University School of
Law. It was at law school that he met Marilyn Tucker, a classmate whom he
married 10 weeks after their first date. The Quayles, who are Presbyterian, have
three children -- Tucker, 18, Ben, 15, and Corinne, 13.

After graduating from law school in 1974, the couple opened a law practice in
Huntington, Ind., where Mr. Quayle's father published the family paper. While
Mr. Quayle was working as associate publisher, local Republican leaders
recruited him to run for Congress.

He upset his Democratic opponent, served two terms, and then ran for the Senate
in 1980, when he upset the Democratic incumbent, Birch Bayh. Mr. Quayle was
re-elected by a large margin in 1986 and then was chosen as a running mate in
1988 by Mr. Bush, who wanted to balance the ticket with youth, conservatism and
a Midwesterner.

As Vice President, Mr. Quayle has aggressively pursued an agenda that includes
calls for parental school choice, civil justice reform, term limitations for
Congress and environmental deregulation.

Enemy of Environmentalists

He maintains that the Council on Competitiveness has saved consumers and small
businesses tens of billions of dollars. But in the process, he has become a
mortal enemy of environmentalists, who complain that he has weakened regulations
intended to preserve open land and limit pollution.

With an eye on 1996, Mr. Quayle has enthusiastically pursued the traditional
party-building duties that go with being Vice President, appearing at hundreds
of events for Congressional candidates and helping to raise nearly $30 million
for his party's candidates.

And he has assembled a staff that is widely admired in Washington for its
political acumen. But the abilities of his aides, and particularly his chief of
staff, William Kristol, have led to reports that Mr. Quayle is the puppet of
underlings preoccupied with their own political and ideological ambitions.

"Look, you've got people out there who are not going to give me credit for
anything," Mr. Quayle said. "So now that they've got to give me grudging credit
for doing a competent job as Vice President, they don't want to give me the
credit so they just say, 'Oh, well, it's someone else.' Well, who do you think
makes these decisions? Who hires these people? Who encourages them to come up
with ideas?"

He added: "On the other hand, you can take it as a backhanded compliment that
we're having an impact. And that's important."

NAME: Dan Quayle

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 22, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A Man in the News profile yesterday of the Vice President, and the headline with
it, rendered his name incorrectly. He is James Danforth Quayle, not James
Danforth Quayle 3d.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Quayle received some assistance from his wife, Marilyn,
before a 1974 ceremony admitting both of them to the Indiana Bar. (Frank
Fisse/The Indianapolis Star); Vice President Dan Quayle and his wife, Marilyn,
being hugged by their children last night after Mr. Quayle's acceptance speech
at the Republican National Convention at the Astrodome in Houston. The children,
from the left, were Benjamin, Corrine and Tucker. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 23; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 377 words



'In Good Conscience' 'The Radical Tradition in 20th-Century American
Illustration' Katonah Museum of Art Katonah, N.Y.

This show, organized by Bernard F. Reilly Jr., offers almost a century's worth
of American political art and includes some of its best-known practitioners,
from John Sloan to Ben Shahn to Sue Coe. Arranged chronologically, the work
reflects such specific events as the Great Depression, the world wars and the
Vietnam War, and such problems as racial violence and civil rights abuses. Since
many of the pieces were intended for newspaper or magazine reproduction, they
are almost all on paper and executed in such rapid-fire mediums as lithographic
crayon and pencil.

A tone of moral intensity naturally energizes many images here. Outstanding
among the nearly 40 works is Robert Minor's "Pittsburgh," from 1916, its
balletic depiction of a uniformed guard bayoneting a striking miner creates an
exceptionally graphic emblem of monumentalized outrage. Paul Cadmus's "To the
Lynching!" (1935) is also memorable. In one of his few pictures on overtly
political subjects, Cadmus infuses an all-male scene of racial violence with a
strong erotic charge.

There is fine work by other artists who receive relatively little attention
these days -- Hugo Gellert and William Gropper among them -- but as always in
the case of polemical art, rhetoric can be problematic. Pitched to the highest
key, it often tends to call attention to its own theatricality as much as to the
political matter at hand. Perhaps for this reason, the most persuasive work is
the quietest. Jacob Lawrence's "Slums," from 1950, with its colorful, patterned,
nearly abstract rows of rotting city blocks, makes its point about urban poverty
through the inclusion of the tiny forms of cockroaches crawling across the sill
of the window framing the scene. Philip Evergood's "North River Jungle," from
1933, is a straightforward and affectionate portrait of homeless men with whom
the artist spent time, and Reginald Marsh has given each of the dozens of
indigent men in his "Bread Line" (1928) a distinctive face and personality. In
these images, humanity rather than ideology seems central, and the sense of good
conscience at work is the stronger for that.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Minor's "Pittsburgh" in "Good Conscience';' show in
Katonah.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Jazz and Rock Outdoors

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 91 words


Free, outdoor performances of jazz, rock-and-roll, rhythm-and-blues, salsa and
reggae by performers from the metropolitan area, are planned from noon to dusk
on Sunday at the amphitheater in the Vietnam Veterans Park, 55 Water Street, in
lower Manhattan. The event, sponsored by Citifest, is called the Basta Music
Festival. It will also feature demonstrations of double-dutch jump roping and
acrobatics, children's entertainment, vendors and medical information booths.
Spectators should bring their own seating. Information: (212) 663-1520.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Children's Books;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Additional titles of interest:

HOANG BREAKS THE LUCKY TEAPOT. By Rosemary K. Breckler. Illustrated by Adrian
Frankel. Houghton Mifflin. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Little Hoang imagines there's a
dragon hissing steam on the table. His blue ball shatters the lucky teapot his
family brought from Vietnam. Hoang makes amends with care and grace.

JOSHUA AND BIGTOOTH. By Mark Childress. Illustrated by Rick Meyerowitz. Little,
Brown. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Bigtooth is a "tiny, shiny, green baby alligator"
Joshua catches and befriends. They spend a wonderful summer together before the
grown gator returns to the river.

LIGHTNING INSIDE YOU: And Other Native American Riddles. Edited by John
Bierhorst. Illustrated by Louise Brierley. Morrow. $14. (Ages 8 to 12) Here are
wonderful questions and wise replies.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Illustration by Adrian Frankel from "Hoang Breaks the Lucky
Teapot.")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

House Revolutionary

BYLINE: By Adam Clymer;  Adam Clymer is the chief Congressional correspondent of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4091 words


A ROOM FULL OF THREE DOZEN CLEAN-CUT COLLEGE Juniors who are spending their
summer as volunteers at the Republican National Committee might seem like an
unlikely place to recruit revolutionaries. Not to Newt Gingrich.

The House Republican whip rushed over to the Capitol Hill Club, a Republican
watering hole, one afternoon last month between critical meetings on enterprise
zone bills and speeches assailing Democrats. In a 20-minute break from his war
on Congress, he told them the welfare state was strangling their dreams. "We
will not make it through your lifetime without radical change," he said. "You're
either going to force the changes, or your generation is going to suffer a long,
steady decline in the quality of life.

"I am essentially a revolutionary," he told them. And like any good
revolutionary, he identified enemies: bureaucrats who run city governments for
their own comfort and not the public's; senior faculty members out of touch with
reality, and, above all, the Democrats. Occasionally, he said, virtuous
Democrats do come to Congress, but they are quickly told by their leaders: "If
you ever want to get on a decent committee, you better learn to sell out." To
whom? To the Democrats' basic elements, "a coalition of big-city machines, trial
lawyers, union leaders, left-wing activists and political incumbents."

Although Gingrich tends to say so many words so fast that his high voice gets
chirpy, like a tape recorder on fast-forward, the volunteers were captivated.
They smiled, asked a few respectful questions and applauded as he exhorted them:
"Real revolutions are made by the young. They are made by the energetic. They
are made by the risk-takers." Then he dashed back to vote against a Democratic
bid to kill Vice President Dan Quayle's White House Council on Competitiveness.

Newton Leroy Gingrich, at age 49, is no longer young, but he is an energetic
risk-taker. He leads one of the least-noticed but potentially most far-reaching
campaigns of this bizarre political year. Gingrich is trying to use voters'
anger at government to end 38 years of Democratic control of the House. Outright
Republican control would require winning 52 more seats, an awesome electoral
swing, but picking up an attainable 30 or so would enable Republicans to
dominate the House in alliance with conservative Democrats. The Republicans now
hold 166 seats out of 435. Gingrich says the odds are "better than even that we
will be above 200 for the first time since 1956. The odds are very, very good."

Gingrich pursues that goal of Republican control in the well of the House,
taunting Democrats as corrupt and despotic. He works at it in Capitol back
rooms, hammering out policy statements so that Republicans can argue they stand
for change. He nourishes it in the office of his political action committee,
Gopac, with telephone hookups that enable dozens of Republican challengers
around the country to tie their strategies to his. And he travels the country
raising money for Republicans by preaching a gospel of lower taxes as the route
to economic growth and more prisons and longer sentences as the path to domestic
order.

Largely because of his efforts, the Republican campaign for House seats is more
organized than it has been in years, unlike the uncertain Bush campaign. For
months, Gingrich has argued openly that the President needed to do more to
define his campaign goals, to call for radical change, to sound more like, well,
like Gingrich. Relations with the White House have been bumpy as a result.

Yet for all the interest Gingrich claims to have in public policy issues like
medical care or better schools, in his 14 years in the House he has spent most
of his energy going after one colleague after another on ethical grounds. He
says his motives were not partisan, but all but one of his targets have been
Democrats. His biggest scalp was Jim Wright's; he brought down the Speaker of
the House in 1989, accusing him of circumventing the rules by accepting payoffs
and selling a pseudo-book.

He portrays himself as forced by knowledge of evil he has acquired to pursue
such charges or become an accomplice. "I don't think I'm a Savanarola," the
Baptist lawmaker said in an interview in May in his PAC office. "I don't think I
have any great interest in running around and finding sin." But he plays very
rough. He insists that one of his own aides who worked against Wright was
falsely accused of spreading the rumor in 1989 that incoming Speaker Thomas S.
Foley was a homosexual. The reporter who accused her, Lars-Erik Nelson of The
Daily News, insists that his article was accurate and says Gingrich sent a
letter to his editor, on Congressional stationery, demanding he be fired. Nor
does he confine his attacks to colleagues who can fight back. He outraged Foley
and many Republicans with a charge they thought far-fetched by saying a Foley
aide might have participated in a coverup of corruption in the House post
office.

His most strenuous campaign has been on the House bank, coaching and encouraging
a group of seven Republican freshmen who made a national scandal out of a
peculiar, terribly run, financial institution in which some members' deposits
covered their colleagues' sometimes spectacular overdrafts. No taxpayers' money
was involved, though Gingrich said the practices reflected "systemic,
institutional corruption." But the growing scandal became political dynamite
through a combination of Republican attacks, the inability of Speaker Foley to
sense political danger and insistent newspaper and radio talk-show arguments
that the dubious checks symbolized how remote Congress was from real life. That
argument, however distant from the hard work, education and honesty that
actually characterizes Congress today, took hold in an environment in which
nothing is getting done about health care or schools or crime.

Gingrich argues that Foley's inability to recognize a "tidal wave" of public
opinion caused the damage. But a tidal wave is a natural phenomenon; this was
more like a forest fire, and Gingrich was there when it started, with gasoline.

His hairsbreadth victory in a July 22 Georgia Republican primary is both the
best evidence of his claim to be a revolutionary, ready to take great risks, and
of the potency of the enmity he has unleashed. His own 22 overdrafts, including
a $9,463 check to the Internal Revenue Service, were the heaviest weapons
against him in an anti-incumbent campaign waged by an underfinanced former state
senator. After lavishing $1.1 million on the race, Gingrich survived, by 980
votes, and the district is so Republican that he seems a shoo-in in November. If
anti-incumbency campaigns like the one waged against him defeat enough
Democrats, he may someday achieve his ambition of becoming Speaker of the House.
It is a goal he has nourished since his teens, when his stepfather, a combat
infantryman, was transferred from Germany to Fort Benning and a bookish Newt
entered politics by running a successful high-school student council campaign.

But as his own close call demonstrated, incumbent Republicans are at risk, too.
The man he calls "my closest friend in the House," Representative Vin Weber of
Minnesota, announced plans to retire after disclosures of 125 overdrafts.
Gingrich sounds pained about Weber's decision, though Weber says Gingrich has
never told him of his sorrow. "He has no desire to do me any political harm,"
Weber observes, and adds, "Newt's sense of the cause that he's pursuing
outweighs all other causes in his mind."

REPUBLICANS OFTEN follow Gingrich out of frustration with Democratic rule. As
Representative Henry J. Hyde, an Illinois Republican and hardly one of
Gingrich's leading supporters, argues, House Republicans find themselves in a
"legislative ghetto" where they are barely tolerated. "That can be infuriating,"
he says. "Even a bunny rabbit, when cornered, will fight back."

Gingrich has prodded his traditionally more accommodating boss, Representative
Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the minority leader, to complain about such
indignities as the fact that Democrats hog the committee staff jobs, with an
average of 5.3 staffers compared with 2.6 for each Republican, and regularly
write floor procedures to keep the Republicans from even offering amendments.

The fractious Democrats need those advantages, because their rank and file
appears to want an organizational free lunch, complaining of weak leadership but
unable to follow with any discipline. Thus, the Democrats are often barely able
to find a consensus in their own party, and they don't dare risk letting a
skillfully drawn amendment shatter it. Representative Frank D. Riggs of
California, one of Gingrich's noisy freshmen, says he came to Congress to deal
with housing and education and got into reform issues only after finding that
"the legislative process is effectively closed to constructive minority input."

In all this, the House is quite different from the Senate. There, nothing gets
done without bipartisan cooperation, whether it is by Robert J. Dole breaking a
logjam on unemployment compensation or John C. Danforth working with Edward M.
Kennedy and overcoming the Bush Administration's opposition to a civil rights
bill. The Senate's rules and, even more, its traditions dictate respect for the
minority. The best lawmakers there, like Kennedy and Dole and Lloyd Bentsen,
know how to find allies across party lines.

But in the House, the Democrats seem oblivious to G.O.P. unhappiness. It is
Gingrich who makes that cauldron of irritability boil over. As Norman Ornstein
of the American Enterprise Institute says, "Newt and a handful of allies can
take a polarized situation and make it 10 times worse."

AS BEFITS A Revolutionary, Gingrich cuts a rumpled figure as he races to keep
appointments and catch planes. He dresses like the assistant professor he once
was, carrying more books and papers than conveniently fit under his arm. His
distinctive helmet of gray hair provides a low-maintenance signature; it's cut
these days at Great Clips of Marietta, Ga., and dries naturally after his
morning shower. His airplane reading tends to be heavy stuff: "Lincoln and the
Radicals" by T. Harry Williams, "The Conservative Party From Peel to Churchill"
by Robert Blake.

On the road, he stops to call his wife, Marianne, several times a day. If he
finds the time, he visits local zoos. (He used speaking fees that exceeded what
House rules allowed him to help the Atlanta zoo buy two baby rhinoceroses, Bo
and Rosie, who have delighted his nieces, Susan and Emmy.)

He has two married daughters from his first marriage, to his high-school math
teacher whom he followed after graduation to Emory University and wed. They were
divorced soon after he got to Congress, with her campaign help. He married
Marianne, an urban planner whom he met on a political trip to Ohio, in 1981.
They live quietly in a town house in Marietta; they have a one-bedroom apartment
on Capitol Hill.

The family has been little in the public eye, but last month one of the
daughters, Kathy Gingrich Lubbers, made news with an abortion-rights appeal.
Gingrich firmly opposes abortion and does not quarrel with his party's staunch
stand against it, but Lubbers came to Washington from her home in Greensboro,
N.C., where she is opening a coffee-bean roasting company, to tell a news
conference sponsored by the National Republican Coalition for Choice: "If the
Republican Party is to appeal to young people in general and specifically to
women, we must throw off the stranglehold that the anti-choice movement has on
the apparatus of the party."

She said that her father had never tried to silence her and that "our family is
big enough to encompass both sides of this issue." For his part, Gingrich said,
"Both my family and my party are strong enough to have healthy, spirited
debates."

Gingrich came to the House from the campus of West Georgia College, where he
taught history, environmental studies and a course on the future. He won his
first election in 1978, on his third try, at age 35. In his speeches, he praises
the college for a program it started to encourage third-graders to read by
paying them $2 for every book they read and explained to an adult. He says the
program shows children that reading is profitable and that adults care about it,
lessons he says billions in Federal aid have never taught. He does not say that
he financed the program for its first few years, from excess speaking fees.

BUT THE Gingrich revolution is not about endowing zoos, or even reading
programs. This is how he defined it in a speech he gave in the House on Jan. 3;
the chamber was all but empty, but he was facing the C-Span camera and its
dedicated following of a couple of hundred thousand Congress addicts, an
audience he has played to with after-session speeches since he arrived:

"Taking the streets back from violent crime and drugs, so local TV news is no
longer a death watch, would be a revolution in every major American city.
Replacing welfare with workfare and ending a process by which teen-age mothers
have children outside marriage with ignorant, irresponsible male children who
have sex but are not fathers would be a revolution. Having schools that are
disciplined, require homework and beat the Japanese in math and science would be
a revolution. Replacing the most expensive, red tape-ridden litigious
health-care system in the world with a revitalized, health-oriented private
system we can afford, and that would be available to everyone, would be a
revolution. Having government bureaucracies that are lean, efficient, courteous
and customer-service oriented would be a revolution. Having a tax code that
favored work, savings and investment, that helped create more and better jobs,
greater productivity and higher take-home pay to make us the fastest growing
industrial economy in the world would be a revolution."

Everything on that list, except probably teen-age pregnancy, is something the
Federal Government might be able to do something about. Ideas of this sort were
Gingrich's passion in his first few years in Congress. With Vin Weber, he
founded the Conservative Opportunity Society, and he performed for the C-Span
audience, even if he didn't know anyone out there who was watching except some
junior Reagan White House staffers.

That sort of follow-through and hard work have not been much in evidence lately.
An 11-month effort to write a health-care bill that emphasizes private insurance
and individual efforts to cut costs is about the only recent effort in the
domain of ideas that he has been a part of. He has taken no action at all on the
one concrete promise in his Jan. 3 speech, a commitment to find money and land
for prisons so that violent offenders can be kept locked up and not turned loose
because of overcrowding. Gingrich asserts he would rather work on ideas and win
elections on them. But, he said in an interview in his Gopac office -- in a
bland office building near the Capitol where aides prepared for that night's
hookup with challengers -- building a consensus on ideas "is a backbreaking,
slow, difficult process."

Nor does he think an all-out effort to spell out revolutionary ideas would help
Republicans right away with the public. Such efforts, he says, would not get
press attention. "It is much easier to communicate, in the current generation of
news media, about scandal than about substance," he says. Moreover, conservative
ideas have not been much use to House Republicans lately. After winning 192
seats with Ronald Reagan in 1980, a dozen years of supporting two of the most
conservative Administrations in history have not led to further gains. Indeed,
the Republicans have never won more than 182 seats since. Today's 166 leave them
52 short of a majority, only 7 ahead of where they were the morning of Reagan's
election.

No one on Capitol Hill doubts that November's elections will produce more House
Republicans. Reapportionment following the census has shifted seats to
Republican parts of the country. The subsequent process of drawing the new
district maps has helped the G.O.P., too, as Republican appointments to the
Federal courts produced rulings at least neutral and sometimes friendly to
Republicans when legislatures and governors could not agree.

But there is more to this year's G.O.P. hopes for the House. Active recruiting
by the National Republican Congressional Committee and by Gingrich's Gopac has
produced 941 Republican hopefuls, half again as many as sought nominations two
years ago. Gopac's most important effort now is to find them money, not by
giving it to them directly but by finding donors. In direct gifts, it can
lawfully give only $10,000 to each candidate. But there is no limit to how much
it can steer their way. Its goal is finding 100 donors, or people promising to
raise $1,000, for each of 170 nonincumbent Republicans.

That goal will not be reached. Political money is short this year. But because
of Gopac, quite a few Republican challengers will get more money than they
otherwise would have. Indeed, a Federal Election Commission report this month
showed that 208 Republican hopefuls had raised $50,000 by June 30, up from 114
two years ago. One who wasn't there yet, Steve Stockman, went to a lunch atop a
Houston bank building where Gingrich was drumming up backing from businessmen
and developers. After the pasta salad and speeches, Stockman approached one
guest, former Treasury Secretary John B. Connally, and told him he was running
against Jack Brooks, the formidable Galveston lawmaker who is finishing his 20th
term in the House and heads the Judiciary Committee. Connally gripped his hand
and said, "Give me your card and I'll send you $1,000." That night in Irvine,
Calif., Gingrich's gospel of Gopac and "revolution" enlisted 35 volunteers to
raise or give $1,000 from a crowd of about 400 Republicans.

Money isn't all Gingrich offers. Each Thursday night, he gets on a telephone
hookup with 60 to 90 Republican challengers, offering them commentary on recent
events and advice about how to campaign. Just after the Los Angeles riots, he
warned them to be sure to denounce "racism, police brutality and violence," and
not to forget any of the three. Then, once a month, Gingrich stages a press
conference in Washington with telephone hookups to their campaign headquarters,
so challengers can identify themselves with, or even claim credit for,
legislative proposals like the Republican health-care plan or a bill to limit
the number of years someone can receive Aid to Families With Dependent Children.

Campaigning on scandal alone may not be enough for Republican challengers if
they ignore national problems, Gingrich believes. Or, as he put it in a brief
appearance at a candidates' training session just before the April lunch in
Houston: "Don't focus in only on scandal on the Hill. They're interesting.
They're great soap opera. They're important. But they have to be attached to
people's lives." To do this, he said, challengers should list the problems the
Democratic Congress is not solving, like health care or jobs, and then say: "And
by the way, the guys who are failing you on every front can't manage the
Capitol. So they have managed to both screw up the Capitol and screw up your
lives and it's their fault."

GINGRICH IS offering advice to others he hasn't followed himself, for his House
career has been continually confrontational. And he has brought the House
minority leader, Michel, along -- to a degree. They still offer something of a
good cop, bad cop routine, with Michel as the genial veteran who can sit down
and talk with Foley and Gingrich as the tough guy who boasts that polls now show
only a fifth of the public approves of how Congress is doing its job. "We've
accommodated pretty well to each other's different traits," Michel says. He adds
that when Gingrich won his position as whip by two votes over a Michel ally in
1989, he had feared constant friction between them. He also worried that
Gingrich would not attend to the basic duty of "whipping" Republicans into
agreement on how to vote. "Some of the earlier concerns I had have dissipated,"
Michel says. "Quite frankly, we complement one another." He says he hopes that
in 1993 he will be Speaker, "being credible and being respected and having a
fair and even hand," while Gingrich could be the Republican majority leader "who
gives the opposition fits."

That might be a relief for the next Bush Administration, if there is one, for in
between his fights with Democrats, Gingrich has tangled with the President and
his aides. In 1990, he took on President Bush and the rest of the Republican
leadership in both houses over that year's budget agreement, which violated
G.O.P. orthodoxy and Bush's own campaign promises by imposing tax increases to
accompany spending cuts. In 1991 he harassed the President into asking Congress
to pass capital-gains tax cuts instead of adjourning, which made Bush look
silly.

But most of the time, he has assaulted Democrats, and on issues of character,
not policy. In 1984, he was speaking to an empty House and a C-Span camera,
attacking one Democrat after another for supposedly unpatriotic sympathies for
the Sandinistas.  Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. was enraged when he heard
about it, and ordered the cameras to pan to show the empty chamber. Then,
O'Neill took the House floor to denounce Gingrich, saying: "My personal opinion
is that you deliberately stood in the well before an empty House and you
challenged their patriotism, and it is the lowest thing that I have ever seen in
my 32 years in the House." Gingrich won that round, when the Speaker suffered
the remarkable rebuke of being ruled out of order for using unparliamentary
language.

He went on to other battles, pushing the Ethics Committee or the whole House
into stiffer sanctions against various Democrats and one Republican,
Representative Dan Crane of Illinois, who was censured for having sex with a
House page. He put less formal pressure on two other backbench Republicans to
resign.

Gingrich's two-year confrontation with Wright over the propriety of the
Speaker's money-making schemes had the air of a vendetta. Gingrich was outraged
at Wright's personal effort to negotiate a political settlement in Nicaragua.
Wright resigned after the Ethics Committee decided there were dozens of charges
against him worth pursuing. Soon after, the committee rejected a counterattack
from Wright's backers. They had charged that businessmen concealed campaign
contributions to Gingrich with $5,000 investments in a book he wrote in 1984.
They lost their money when the book did not sell.

His support among Republicans in the House is solid, stronger than when he
squeaked through to the whip's job in 1989. A Connecticut moderate like Nancy
Johnson sings his praises, recalling how he helped her devise parliamentary
tactics to push abortion rights even though he disagreed with her aim. Scott
Klug of Wisconsin, one of his freshman followers, found him encouraging on the
House bank issue when many senior members were not. Gingrich told them: "If you
guys think this is right, go for it." He worries some Republicans, like his
friend Weber, who is troubled by the emphasis on personal attacks even as he
hails Gingrich as a rare Representative who thinks about politics on a grand
scale, beyond the next election or the next amendment.

Some Republicans who will not talk for attribution see him as a destructive
force. They agree with Representative David R. Obey, a senior Wisconsin Democrat
whom Gingrich says he respects for his diligence and trustworthiness. Obey says
he sometimes sees "the ghost of Joe McCarthy" in Gingrich. "Newt enjoys smearing
people's character," he says. "He contributes to the destruction of the body
politic."

For years, Democrats have said his tactics amount to a desire to burn the House
down, in the expectation that since it has a Democratic majority, more Democrats
than Republicans will suffer and new Republicans will take their places.

That view of him is now spreading on both sides of the House. One lawmaker after
another agrees with the notion that Gingrich is the political equivalent of the
Air Force major in a famous interview amid the rubble of Ben Tre in South
Vietnam. It was just after the Tet offensive in 1968, and the major explained,
"It became necessary to destroy the town in order to save it."

NAME: Newt Gingrich

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Never far from a phone, left, or a cadre of strategists, right,
Gingrich presses his attack. Here, he does it from the Republican whip's office.
(Photographs by Robert McNeeley for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Bruce Dern's Career of Con Men and Killers

BYLINE: By JAMIE DIAMOND;  Jamie Diamond, a contributing editor at Lear's
magazine, writes about movies for Premiere and Entertainment Weekly.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1557 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


He gets out of one of those tiny black Mercedes and shuffles into the swank
hotel, past silk flowers in marble vases that stand taller than he does. By now
it is clear his shuffle is not an affectation of cool; he's limping. Maybe
because he's wearing no socks with his Reeboks, maybe because he -- the
inveterate runner -- has twisted his ankle? No, Bruce Dern says, that's just the
way he walks. "I hate to walk. I never walk anywhere. I never stand unless I
absolutely have to. When I can lie down and take a nap, I do. If I can get into
repose, I'm in repose because I know eventually I'm going to have to get up and
move very quickly."

Mr. Dern's roles often demand that he move swiftly. The 56-year-old actor has
shot John Wayne on screen in "The Cowboys," threatened to blow up the entire
Super Bowl crowd in "Black Sunday," chewed the furniture in dozens of movies as
a psychopath, and won an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of a
traumatized Vietnam veteran in "Coming Home." He is now appearing in
"Diggstown," the tale of a sting operation directed by Michael Ritchie that
recently opened to favorable reviews. Vincent Canby, in The Times, called it "a
funny and vulgar fable about con artists." In this movie, Mr. Dern plays yet
another scoundrel, working opposite Louis Gossett Jr. and a fellow no-goodster,
James Woods.

Easing himself gingerly onto a couch, Mr. Dern orders a Coke. Since this is
Beverly Hills, the waiter asks if Mr. Dern didn't mean a Diet Coke. Mr. Dern
says no way. He explains that he has run 104,000 miles, the equivalent of four
times around the world, and that he is tired. In an urgent whisper that suggests
he is about to reveal the secret of cold fusion, he says, "I'm addicted to
running, I am screwed up by running. I haven't missed a day in nine years and
I've missed five days in 30 years. It's sick. I wake up in the morning and I
dread having to run. I have been begging myself to miss a day for the last year
and a half, but I can't do it."

It is this kind of obsession that makes Mr. Dern such a winning villain. While
he has railed against Hollywood for its failure to see him as a comedian or a
romantic lead, he remains, in spite of himself, one of our most beloved wackos.
Why is he so convincing? Look at his smile.

"It's a lethal smile," says James Woods, who ought to know. "When Bruce smiles
at me, I smile back, and then check to see if my wallet is in my pocket."

Says Mr. Ritchie: "Even when he's doing heinous things, he's smiling all the
time." The director adds that he apologized when he offered Mr. Dern the part of
John Gillon in "Diggstown." "It's the psycho part," he says.

Not exactly. Mr. Dern just plays a despicable, dishonest businessman who cheats
the citizens of a small Georgia town out of their property. Enter the ace con
artist Gabriel Caine (Mr. Woods) and his partner, Honey Roy Palmer (Mr.
Gossett), and it's a hustlers' showdown.

The role is an apt one for Mr. Dern, who began as a Method actor more than 30
years ago, studying with Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio and working briefly
on Broadway with Elia Kazan. In 1960, he moved to California and began his
Hollywood education. Along with Jack Nicholson, Warren Oates, Peter Fonda and
Dennis Hopper, he majored in maniacs, appearing in films with titles like
"Crybaby Killer," "Cycle Savages" and "Bloody Mama." In "The Incredible
Two-Headed Transplant," he ate a baby. For "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" on
television, he played a peach picker who terrorizes a woman by forcing her to
bake her pet squirrel in the oven.

To play the kind of characters who bake squirrels and eat babies, Mr. Dern, a
Method actor to the core, says he was forced to spend a lot of time on the
twisted backroads of his own personality. "Playing villains makes you confront a
considerable amount of darkness for a considerable amount of time." Fortunately,
not every role called for an examination of destructive behavior. "In 1967, I
did a movie called 'The Trip' with Peter Fonda. Peter had just had Bridget and I
had just had my daughter Laura. He was terrified that he wasn't going to be a
good father."

In "The Trip," the character played by Mr. Dern gives L.S.D. to the character
played by Mr. Fonda. "He dives into the pool," Mr. Dern says. "I take him out
and carry him around in my arms, letting him know that it's O.K. But that entire
scene is me telling him that he's going to make it as a father, that he doesn't
need to panic." He adds, "I had fears, too."

Five years earlier, Mr. Dern and his wife, Diane Ladd, had lost their first
daughter in a swimming pool accident when she was 18 months old. "My fears were
not of being able to be a good father, but of being able to get somebody to live
longer than 18 months."

Mr. Dern admits that he paid a price for mining his psyche in search of his
coarser impulses. "It changes your life. It makes you look for the darkness in
everybody you see. It makes you have a tendency to be in multiple relationships,
especially when you're young." After a brief first marriage and the marriage to
Ms. Ladd, Mr. Dern has spent the last 23 years married to Andrea Beckett, a
former acting student.

His screen scoundrels have influenced his family as well. "One night when Laura
was two, I got a call from her mother. She was screaming. She said, 'You've got
to talk to your daughter. She just saw your head bouncing down the stairs on
television and she wants to know you're O.K.' "

Mr. Dern laughs. "And that was in 'Hush . . . Hush, Sweet Charlotte,' where I
play a good guy."

After a decade of playing mostly bad guys, Mr. Dern moved to a different level.
"I got big roles," he says. "But none of my movies did anything at all." In
1971, with the help of a fellow B-movie alumnus named Jack Nicholson, he was
cast as a basketball coach in "Drive, He Said." He followed that with a starring
role in "Silent Running," and teamed up with Mr. Nicholson again in Bob
Rafelson's dark and disturbing "King of Marvin Gardens." The rest of the decade
saw him in "The Laughing Policeman," "The Great Gatsby," "Black Sunday," "Coming
Home" and "Middle-Age Crazy," among other films.

Still, while his contemporaries Warren Beatty, Robert Redford and Mr. Nicholson
dominated the 80's, Mr. Dern felt his career was floundering. "Because I
accepted those roles as villains early on," he says, "I was perceived as a
lesser- -than-normal, over-the-edge kind of character."

What does he think would have happened if his first role had been a romantic
one? "I wouldn't have survived. I didn't have an attractive, infectious-enough
personality as a young man to be comfortable in a romantic role," he answers. "I
look at Redford or Beatty. I have a feeling that Redford had a pretty easy time
with girls, as I'm sure Warren did. I never had that."

When Mr. Dern describes events that occurred 40 or 50 years ago, his blue eyes
cloud over with betrayal. The middle child in a prominent Illinois family, Mr.
Dern began running at 12 and switched over to acting at 18, when he quit the
University of Pennsylvania track team rather than shave off his Elvis-inspired
sideburns. On his mother's side of the family was the Pulitzer Prize-winning
poet Archibald MacLeish. His father was Adlai Stevenson's law partner. And his
paternal grandfather was the Governor of Utah and the Secretary of War under
F.D.R.

"We had a very structured life, with a chauffeur and a butler and a governess.
However, when I was in the eighth grade, I performed rather poorly on a
day-to-day basis in my household." Mr. Dern says this as if he were describing a
temperamental vacuum cleaner. "As a result, my parents sent me to Choate with
the idea that it would shape me up."

What had he done?

"They thought I was incorrigible."

What had he done?

Mr. Dern pauses and chews his lip. "I gambled. When I lost I would take a bottle
of liquor from the cabinet and give it to whomever I lost money to."

He gambled and he stole?

"I didn't steal money. I was just avidly interested in the gaming nature of
sports. There were five of us. One of the other four married my sister. He
didn't have to go to Choate. And two years later, when I came back to high
school after Choate, I had a horrible, horrible stigma." Mr. Dern whispers,
"When you come back to a public high school from a prep school, you never ever
fit in."

It is hard to gauge how serious Mr. Dern is about his horrible, horrible stigma.
"Bruce emotionally and mentally grabs your head in a vise when he gets you in a
private conversation," says Mr. Ritchie. "You feel the two of you are locked
together in the moment and the rest of the world can be damned. On the other
hand, he will put people on as soon as look at them."

Mr. Gossett offers another explanation. "It's an actor's thing. When Bruce tells
stories from his childhood, he turns it into a sense-memory exercise."

As Mr. Dern begins his fourth decade as an actor, he will be remembered for his
1990 portrayal of the sinister Uncle Bud in "After Dark, My Sweet." And then
there is his role as the despicable businessman in Diggstown. He just cannot
seem to rub out those villainous spots. How does he handle the way Hollywood
perceives him? Mr. Dern smiles and says as gently as he can, "Right now, I'm
just glad they perceive me."

NAME: Bruce Dern

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruce Dern, who says he has run the equivalent of four times
around the world, in a rare stationary moment at a Los Angeles boxing ring -- An
obsessive character. (Steve Goldstein/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

1 Marshal Dead, Others Confront Fugitive in Idaho

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: NAPLES, Idaho, Aug. 22


A fugitive remained holed up in a remote mountaintop cabin today as the Federal
authorities sent in more than 100 agents and helicopters and small armored
vehicles hours after the fatal shooting of a Federal marshal.

It was not clear what the Federal agents planned to do next. A negotiation team
was called, but the authorities were not able to contact the fugitive because he
has no telephone. A telephone company truck and an armed personnel carrier were
taken behind three roadblocks to the scene.

A Federal Bureau of Investigation helicopter could be seen flying over the
cabin.

The agents did not immediately move in because the fugitive, Randy Weaver, a
44-year-old white supremacist, lives with his wife, three school-age children
and an 8-month-old daughter, born in the cabin last winter. Federal agents say
they have previously seen the older children armed with handguns.

About two dozen neighbors gathered near the main roadblock this afternoon to
protest the presence of Federal agents. They held up signs proclaiming, "Freedom
of Religion" and "Your Family Could Be Next."

No Electricity

Mr. Weaver, a former Special Forces soldier in Vietnam, retreated to the cabin
in January 1991 and failed to appear for trial the next month on Federal weapons
charges. The cabin, about 30 miles south of the Canadian border, has no
electricity, only a portable generator.

Officials at the Marshals Service headquarters in Washington said six deputy
marshals were checking on Mr. Weaver on Friday, just as they had been doing
periodically for many months, when they came under fire. The slain deputy was
identified as William F. Degan, 42, who was based in Boston.

After the shooting, continuing gunshots from the cabin pinned down three other
deputies who remained with the body until nightfall, when they were rescued by
an Idaho State Police crisis response team. The team removed the body of the
slain marshal.

Henry Hudson, director of the Marshal Service in Washington, immediately sent
the agency's special operations team to the scene. The F.B.I. and the Bureau of
Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms also sent in hostage rescue teams and agents.

Army helicopters and armored personnel carriers were flown to Spokane and taken
by truck to a hastily assembled command post in a wooded valley just below the
mountaintop cabin that Mr. Weaver built by hand.

He has managed to remain in the cabin because he has been supplied food and
other needs from friends and supporters in the area, many of whom share his
white supremacist, anti-government views.

Ran for Sheriff

But while the Federal authorities painted Mr. Weaver as a dangerous white
supremacist, people in Naples viewed him as a family man, who ran as a
Republican candidate for sheriff in 1988 promising to enforce only the laws the
people wanted enforced.

"It's a headstrong Federal Government against a headstrong guy up on that
mountaintop," said Greg DeBoer, a Naples sawmill worker who knows Mr. Weaver.

Another man, Bill Grider, said the shooting of of the marshal was a "government
setup, that's what it is.

Mr. Grider said he was one of several people who has brought food and supplies
to the fugitive for the past 20 months so the family did not have to leave the
mountaintop hideaway.

"The man ain't hurt no one," Mr. Grider said.

Mr. Grider said he had stopped visiting the Weaver cabin about two months ago
after Mr. Weaver suspected him of being a Federal informer.

Another man, Loren Jones, 48, of LaClede, said he wanted to act as a go-between
in an attempt to talk Weaver out of the standoff situation.

Federal officials say Mr. Weaver has past ties to the Aryan Nations, a white
supremacist group located in nearby Hayden Lake. He says he is a Christian.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Idaho, indicating Naples.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bias Beating And a Death Shock a City

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: CORAL SPRINGS, Fla., Aug. 21


Last weekend in this small Southeast Florida city, a 19-year-old pre-medical
student who came to this country as a child with his parents from Vietnam, was
fatally beaten by a group of young white men after he objected to a racial slur
one of them used.

The student, Luyen Phan Nguyen, of Coral Springs, died Monday. The Broward
County Medical Examiner said the fatal blow was a kick behind an ear that
fractured a neck bone and severed arteries.

On Wednesday, with newspapers and television stations reporting each
development, the police began arresting young men they said were tied to the
beating.

On Thursday, 175 friends and family members held a Buddhist ceremony for Mr.
Nguyen, and some prayed near where he was beaten. Afterward, the county's small
Asian community pleaded for justice.

Former classmates at Coral Springs High School said Mr. Nguyen was popular and
an excellent student. He was on the school math team, ran track and was in the
environmental club. He would have been a sophomore this fall at the University
of Miami.

Lingering Unease for Residents

With the arrests and the family's anguish receiving wide publicity, residents
said it would take a long time to recover from the kind of violence and bias
that were virtually unknown in their upper-middle-class city of 85,000 people.

"This is Coral Springs, a family neighborhood," said Yazid Ali, who moved here a
year ago from Jamaica, Queens, with his wife and young son. "In this
neighborhood, you can't fix your car in the street. You get a ticket for that.
You can't have a sign advertising your business on your car. There are so many
rules. I can't understand how this could happen."

The incident began late Saturday at a party attended by Mr. Nguyen and the young
men in the apartment complex where Mr. Ali lives. Someone made a derogatory
remark about Mr. Nguyen's nationality. He protested and left, witnesses told the
police. They said several young men followed Mr. Nguyen out the door.

"It started off with some young guy wanting to be a tough guy, and everybody
just got involved," said a police investigator, James P. Milford. "They chased
him down like a hunter chases down an injured deer."

Mr. Ali said he heard cursing and "drunk talk" around 11 P.M. in a grassy area
between buildings. He went to his balcony and saw 15 to 20 people, some of them
hitting someone on the ground.

"I yelled, 'Let him up, let him up!' " Mr. Ali said. "They were really beating
up this kid."

8 Arrested in Beating

A neighbor telephoned the police as the beating continued and after a few
minutes, Mr. Ali said, it stopped. Witnesses said the attackers got into cars
and left as residents tried to help Mr. Nguyen, who appeared to have stopped
breathing. Paramedics arrived and took him to a Fort Lauderdale hospital, where
officials said he was on a life-support system until he died.

By Friday, the police had arrested eight men in the case, 18 to 22 years old,
and charged them with second-degree murder.

Coral Springs's police chief, Roy A. Arigo, said that some of the suspects had
minor criminal records but that most were middle-class working men with no
record of trouble. One had just returned home after completing Marine boot camp
at Camp Lejeune, N.C., and one said he was unemployed. The others said they
worked at resorts, automobile dealerships and other businesses.

Rights groups issued pleas for tolerance, saying they feared the incident might
be an indication that bias was on the rise here. The state authorities said 43
bias crimes were reported in Broward County in 1991, none involving Asians.

Like Mr. Ali, many Coral Springs residents seemed to fear that the kind of
violence they fled in other parts of the country and that they associate with
other parts of Southeast Florida seemed to be gaining in the city.

Coral Springs's Mayor, Jeanne Mills, blamed a "party out of control," where
"everyone was under some kind of influence."

Chief Arigo said: "Coral Springs enjoys a very low crime rate. In fact, the
crime rate is the lowest for a city of our size in Southeast Florida, but this
just goes to show you that no matter where you live, violence is part of
society."

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dream Team Nightmare

SECTION: Section 8; Page 11; Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 63 words


To the Sports Editor:

Stephen King's "Dream Team: Just Another Horror Show" (The Times, Aug. 9)
illuminated my personal Olympic nightmares. Ugly Americans once again stomping
some poor weaker countries and calling it sport. It's the Vietnam syndrome
playing itself out in the 90's.

When the Dream Team came on, I went to bed.

GEOFFREY S. BAKER
Ellicott City, Md.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Leaving the Cities Farther Behind

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 1; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1864 words


LATE on a recent hazy summer afternoon in Madison, Marian Darling sat in her
quiet Cape on a pristine street near Hammonasset Beach State Park and fondly
recalled the late 1960's. It was a time of great hope, said Mrs. Darling, an
athletic-looking woman with wavey white hair and blue-gray eyes. Her family had
taken part in civil rights marches in Washington, D.C., and her son had been a
conscientious objector during the Vietnam War.

"But it all seems to have gotten so much worse," she murmured, as a Baroque
concerto played in the background. "I'm just so disappointed."

On her coffee table were copies of The New Haven Register. She said she
subscribed to the newspaper because she felt obliged to stay informed about the
issues facing the city 15 miles to the west, though much of what she read she
found disconcerting.

"You really don't want to spend your morning reading about one more murder," she
said. "But then again, it's not right to isolate yourself."

Madison, a manicured shoreline community dotted with Colonial and Federal style
homes, white picket fences and stone walls, is an oasis of tranquillity compared
with its urban neighbors. And like some residents in well-off suburban towns
across the state, Mrs. Darling, who has lived in Madison for more than a decade,
said she felt some anxiety about how her town and others like it have distanced
themselves from the not-so-distant urban problems.

Divisions Grow

To the west of Madison lie the drug-torn streets of New Haven and Bridgeport, to
the north Middletown where each day 325 people visit a soup kitchen. Farther
north, in Hartford, a third of the city's families have incomes below the
poverty line.

The divisions between urban and suburban, rich and poor, black and white have
become increasingly apparent over the past decade as more of the burden for
financing education, social programs, public works, recreation and welfare has
shifted from the Federal Government to the states, and then to the cities. A
recent study profiling Connecticut's towns and schools, distributed by the
state's Department of Education, reported that the median family income in many
of the state's suburbs is nearly twice that, or more, of their urban neighbors.
In Madison, for example, the median family income is about $30,000 compared with
$15,000 in New Haven; in Farmington the figure is $27,100 compared with $14,000
in Hartford, while in Westport the figure is $44,500 compared with $16,700 in
Bridgeport.

The result is two distinct worlds. This is because many suburban communities can
pay for schools, libraries and streets, while urban areas remain hard pressed.
So much so that city officials in New Haven, Bridgeport and Hartford have long
condemned suburban towns for pulling up the drawbridge and retreating from the
growing array of social problems.

"It's not on my mind until I pick up the paper," said Tony Cavallaro, owner of
Tony's Barbershop on Main Street in Madison, referring to the rise in drug
violence in New Haven. Inside his nautical-style shop where he has worked for 28
years, Mr. Cavallaro said he was primarily concerned with activities in Madison,
and has watched the town grow from a sleepy seaside hamlet to a bustling
suburban community of nearly 16,000 residents.

Working for the Good Life

"Life is good here because people work at it," he said. An active member of the
Rotary Club, Mr. Cavallaro helped coordinate and run fund-raising events for the
Visiting Nurses Association and he volunteers his time for several other civic
projects. Although he said he felt bad about the growing urban ills, and how
businesses in downtown New Haven were forced to contend with high crime, the
suburban towns, he said, "can't be the overseer for the State of Connecticut. We
have our own to take care of."

Other residents said they felt that city officials and advocates around the
state were unjustly using the argument that suburban residents don't care as an
excuse for urban problems. "The intellectuals are unfairly charging suburban
towns with insensitivity," said Nick Mason, a retired mechanical engineer who
lives in a three-bedroom home on two acres. "The fact is that people out here
have worked hard to move to a place where they can find some peace and quiet.
We're not all the idle rich."

Suffering Compassion Burnout

As in suburbs elsewhere, many people in Madison give generously to charities and
volunteer to help the poor and homeless. Yet others acknowledge that they have
recoiled, perhaps reluctantly and unconsciously, because issues like AIDS, crack
and violence have become too overwhelming to grasp.

"In the 1960's, we all thought our problems were solveable," said Lindalea Pite
Ludwick, a lawyer, who lives with her two teen-aged children in Madison and
commutes daily to her office in New Haven. "But now we've developed this great
underclass of people who are ethnically and racially different than those with a
stake. And while white suburbanites may feel they are doing something by giving
money and clothes, we have no idea what it's like to hear gunshots."

To a large extent, residents in suburban towns are the product of demographic
change. In commuter towns like Madison, most of whose professionals and
executives trek to New Haven, Hartford or other cities, both parents often work
to support their life style. With their lives consumed by their careers and
their children, they find little time and energy for anything else.

Several residents said they suffered from compassion burn-out. Frustrated by the
lack of progress despite enormous resources devoted to societal problems, they
have turned inward or have given their time and energy to causes they believe
will return a benefit.

North vs. South in Madison

Tom Lee, an engineer, his wife, Jennifer Hoffman-Lee, and their two young
children live in a four-bedroom Colonial on five wooded acres they bought in
1986. The couple lived in large urban areas before moving to Connecticut. During
the late 60's, Mr. Lee said, he participated in community outreach programs for
poor people in Los Angeles.

"I found a lot of people were given the opportunity to improve their lives but
they just didn't take it," he said. "It taught me to limit myself to those
things I can handle, such as church activities and local environmental issues."

In some ways, Madison itself is a town divided. The "us" and "them" in this case
is between the mostly retired residents and those who own summer homes in the
southern section of town, and the newer residents with school-aged children like
the Lees, who live in North Madison. Among the top priorities for those with
young families, of course, is Madison's school system, which is considered
exceptional. Students taking S.A.T.'s in preparation for college score
consistently above the national mean, and 84 percent of those who graduate from
Daniel Hand High School, the town's only public high school, go on to college.
Last spring when Madison's education budget was defeated, dozens of parents were
roused into action, protesting outside the Town Hall.

"If you took a look at the voting pattern it was pretty clearly divided between
the north and the south," said Mrs. Hoffman-Lee, an organizer of the protest who
teaches at a local nursery school and is active in the Parent-Teachers
Association. "It was like our own little civil war."

Lack of Affordable Housing

As in many suburban towns, Madison has its share of pressing issues; one is a
lack of housing priced for lower-income people and workers. John C. Herman, an
architect who founded Madison Housing Inc., a group of volunteers in charge of
finding and designing sites for an estimated 400 units of such housing, said
that the committee was about to begin a public relations campaign on the issue
because of the resistance they had received from residents whose neighborhoods
might be affected by the plan. The average price for a home in Madison is
$234,000, he said.

"There's this notion that we're going to build a bunch of slums," said Mr.
Herman, formerly a professor at the Yale School of Architecture who is now the
head of the Madison Arts and Science Council. "We're trying to target people
from our own community who simply can't afford to live here, like teachers,
volunteer firemen and city workers," he said.

Last month Madison became the first in the state to fire its police chief,
Dennis Anziano, under a 53-year-old "just cause" statute. Mr. Anziano was
dismissed on five counts that ranged from buying tires for his pick-up truck on
the town's account to ordering a machine gun for a local landscaper and
purchasing a hand gun for a private citizen.

Then, in June, a 43-year-old woman was murdered in an isolated spot at
Hammonasset Beach State Park, sending shock waves through the nearby Madison
community. Police have not found a suspect or motive for the killing.

"We're not isolated from problems," said Bob Schmidt. A lobster fisherman whose
family's roots in the town go back three generations, Mr. Schmidt pointed out
that several storefronts on Main Street had been vacant for months and that the
10 percent rise in population over the last decade had changed the town's
atmosphere.

Urban Problems Come Near

"The city's problems are encroaching like a cancer," said Mr. Schmidt, whose
grandfather used to deliver ice in a horse-drawn wagon during the 1930's. "Years
ago you never worried about sending the kids anywhere," he said. "Now we've got
unofficial block watches. It's become much more tense."

Still, he said, the town remains a place where children know the names of police
dogs and neighbors chat over fences. Madison prides itself on its Memorial Day
and Fourth of July parades, he said, and people still smile and say hello on the
street even if they do not know you.

"The big difference between us and them is the life style," he said. "Out here
we can take our kids to the beach or teach them lobstering. Whereas, in the city
their idea of having a good time is opening a fire hydrant."

The incongruities between urban and suburban life, and the lack of opportunities
afforded many urban children, make Edna Orlins nervous. So much so that the
former school teacher who moved to Madison from South Orange, N.J., four years
ago, has taken it upon herself to come up with some solutions.

'Giving Something Back'

Three times a week she drives to the Hill section of New Haven, to tutor
children at Prince Elementary School, and she regularly visits the home of one
student who lives in the Church Street South housing project where gang activity
has thrived. Mrs. Orlins also helps coordinate an exchange program that brings
city school children to a Madison school for the day and she invites these
children to her home on the weekends.

Unless suburban residents begin to recognize the inner connection of every
community in the state, she said, they are courting disaster. "We can no longer
live behind this protective wall," said Mrs. Orlins, who is also a foster
parent.

"We use their services, we work there, it's time we started giving something
back."

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Voices of Stoicism, Fear and Revelry As Many Prepare to Ride Out Storm

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1371 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 23


Shortly before noon, with the sun still shining brightly but with reports of the
approach of Hurricane Andrew beginning to throb with urgency, Karen Madsen drew
the drapes, shut off the electricity and said goodbye to her waterfront condo
here.

Like most of the other residents in her six-building complex overlooking
Biscayne Bay, Ms. Madsen, a 46-year-old banker, had not installed storm shutters
and said she had no way to board up the huge plate-glass windows that give her
fourth-floor apartment a spellbinding marine panorama.

"I just have to hope for the best," she said as she checked into a hotel on the
edge of Miami International Airport where the loading ramps were jammed and
airline officials said every flight out was booked solid.

Stoicism and Daring

As the most powerful hurricane in years bore down on the glistening,
glass-encased hotel and office towers, the mansions and the simple sunbaked
homes of Miami, residents and visitors turned to face the story each in his own
way.

Everyone was at least a little apprehensive. Some were terrified. Some were
stoic, fatalistic. Some laughed at the danger.

Many took the advice of the authorities and headed for shelter well away from
the magnificent waters that embrace the city.

But throughout the vast evacuation zone from the Florida Keys to well north of
Miami, many others said they would ride out the storm no matter what anyone told
them.

James L. Greenhill, an 87-year-old lawyer who has undergone several hip
operations, said he did not want to leave his third-floor apartment and could
not even if he wanted to.

"I can't even move without those damn things," he said, gesturing contemptuously
toward a pair of spindly alloy walkers.

"I'm staying," Mr. Greenhill said firmly. "I don't know where the hell to go.
The shelters are awful."

His wife, Doris, who had set out kerosene lamps and flashlights and was boiling
a batch of eggs, offered no dissent. "If the house goes," she said, "we go. I
hope it is not painful."

Stuck in the Keys

In Key West, many tourists who were unable to get away on commercial or
chartered flights tried to hire taxis to drive them to Miami, 164 miles to the
northeast, but found no takers. "It's an eight-hour drive to Miami, and we may
get stuck on a bridge," said Morgan Haas, a cab driver.

Actually, the trip to Miami was taking about five hours by late afternoon,
Monroe County emergency officials said. Normally, the drive is about three
hours.

Joe Morgan, a Key West bartender, said he would rather stay home than risk
getting caught in heavy traffic. "Just think," he said, "there are other
islands, and we're at the end."

Mr. Morgan and his friend Don Kissee were stocking up with 10 gallons water,
rice, beans and, Mr. Kissee said, "Don't forget the two cases of Red Stripe
beer."

A Run on Supplies

Toward evening, most of the South Florida gas stations and hardware stores and
pharmacies and groceries that had been mobbed since midnight Saturday had shut
down, their owners and employees gone off to take care of themselves and their
families.

But in the island community of North Bay Village, halfway between Miami and
Miami Beach in Biscayne Bay, clerks at the big, pink-trimmed Woolley's
Supermarket, a new local chain that has aggressively going after sales in these
recessionary times with a 24-hour operation, were still ringing up sales from a
few stragglers who ducked through a narrow opening in the stainless-steel window
coverings.

At Woolley's, like most other stores by now, there was plenty of fresh produce,
but the bread shelves and all the bottled water and whole sections of canned
goods were gone.

So were all the flashlight batteries.

Michael Campbell, a physical education teacher who moved from Newark almost
exactly a year ago for the "nice weather" and now picks up extra money as a
part-time stock clerk, said a lot of people at Woolley's and other stores where
he had stopped for storm supplies had attacked the shelves "as if the end of the
world was coming."

"People were bumping and shoving," Mr. Campbell said. "I reached for a roll of
masking tape at a discount store and a woman physically pushed me out of the way
as if I was reaching for money. I took a roll and gave her one. Pathetic."

Teak Protection

At the Shell Lumber and Hardware Store in Coconut Grove this afternoon, more
than 50 people waited to buy sheets of plywood to board up their windows. Some
had been waiting for hours.

Griffith Pitcher, a lawyer, said he said he was concerned that the lumber yard
was increasing its prices throughout the afternoon. Original plywood prices
quoted at around $22 had moved up $40 as he was waiting, he said.

A salesman, Herb Cilio, confirmed that the price had risen but said it was
because the store had run through the cheaper stocks of plywood by early this
morning. By afternoon, he said, the only supplies left were of red oak, mahogany
and teak.

At the Publix Supermarket in Coconut Grove, Ivette Abreu, a 16-year-old working
on the cash register, said crowds were so bad in the morning that managers often
had to lock the doors.

Making Room for Guests

By early evening, few cars were on the streets. By dusk, most of whatever was
going on was going on inside.

At the University of Miami's School of Medicine, guards went from floor to floor
unlocking doors to private offices that were being converted into temporary
shelters for friends, family members and others who had no other place to go.

Though the building usually has about 50 guards and other staff on Sunday
evenings, a guard said more than 200 people were there tonight. Most arrived
carrying pillows, bags of food and radios.

At the curb in front of Woolley's, Shanna Ochery, a 29-year-old unemployed
cocktail waitress, and Michael Swift, a 38-year-old hotel pool attendant from
New London, Conn., were sitting in Ms. Ochery's faded 1983 Le Baron Chrysler
convertible with the top down. They were wishing that their friend James
Roberts, a 35-year-old aviation mechanic who lost his job when Pan American
World Airways went bankrupt, would hurry with the beer.

"We're going to have three cases of beer and a couple watermelons," Mr. Swift
said. "We've got a first-floor apartment over on the water. We figure this thing
is going to hit pretty hard. But we're going to ride it out."

Ms. Ochery, who said she has lived in Miami for years, said she was not nervous.
"No," she said. "I've never been in a hurricane before." She tossed her platinum
ponytail and a laugh creased her deep tan. "Hey," she said, "you gotta die
sometime. It can't be that bad."

'It's My Property'

David Fugatt, who served with the Marines in Vietnam, said everything he had was
tied up in his sprawling waterfront home and the adjoining set of apartments.
"They'd better be ready to arrest me," he said of the police. "I'm not going."
He was paying for 10 cans of food for his two cats. He had already provisioned
his 52 exotic birds.

Sure, Mr. Fugatt said, he was tempting fate. "But," he said simply but
unequivocally, "it's my property. I've got to protect it."

Munsey Goldstein who is 75 years old and retired from the liquor business in
Baltimore, was not nearly so determined. He and his wife, Lily, had wrapped
their treasured paintings in towels and clothing and placed them on high closet
shelves. Then they packed overnight bags and headed for a hotel, leaving their
house with its big picture windows, standing on a spit between the ocean and the
bay, to confront the storm as best it could.

"We didn't board up," he said. "We couldn't do that ourselves."

"I'm very nervous," Mr. Goldstein said, but he was not too nervous to remember
to brag about his son, the jazz musician, who lives in New York and makes a lot
of money, he said, ghost writing scores for big names in the movie business.

"First, there's the heavy rain," Mr. Goldstein said. "Even a heavy downpour
clogs the street drains. So I'm afraid of the water. And the flying objects that
can break windows. And then we're afraid of robberies. They wait for times like
this. And we've got tremendous trees two, three stories tall. Wouldn't you be
worried?"


LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In preparation for Hurricane Andrew, Ramona Myrick taped windows
in Pompano Beach, Fla. The hurricane which struck the Bahamas yesterday
afternoon is expected to reach the coast this morning. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The 'American Century': Beneficence or Illusion?

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 998 words



Grand Illusion
Critics and Champions
of the American Century
By John B. Judis
344 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.

Is this departing century the American Century or is that idea only a "Grand
Illusion," as John B. Judis calls it in the title of his thought-provoking book?
In a Presidential election year, is the American Century just an old-fashioned
jingoistic slogan, backed up by military threats and force, or do the words have
some kinder, gentler meaning that takes into account the rest of the civilized
world?

In a grandiloquent essay that appeared in a February 1941 issue of Life
magazine, Henry Luce, founder of the Time Inc. publishing empire, tried to
define what he branded the American Century. "It now becomes our time," he
wrote, "to be the powerhouse from which the ideals spread throughout the world
and do their mysterious work of lifting the life of mankind from the level of
beasts to what the Psalmist called a little lower than the angels."

Fifty years later, after the American-led coalition victory in the Persian Gulf
war, President Bush repeatedly invoked the notion of an American Century again.
Speaking to Congress, he said the nation's best days were yet to come in the
next American Century. At the Air Force Academy, he told the cadets that the
United States had the strength to bear the burden of world leadership. On
Veterans Day 1991, he said that the gulf war demonstrated that "America holds a
special place in history" and that "we've sought to extend the blessings of
liberty throughout the world."

In his well-organized and opinionated book Mr. Judis, a writer for In These
Times and The New Republic and author of "William F. Buckley Jr.: Patron Saint
of the Conservatives," presents a variety of views on the theme of the American
Century.  The author follows the Lytton Strachey ("Eminent Victorians") style of
history: essays in iconoclasm built around a group of conflicting personalities.

Among them are Henry A. Wallace, Walter Lippmann, George F. Kennan, J. William
Fulbright, Barry Goldwater, Lee A. Iacocca, Henry A. Kissinger and three
Presidents, Richard M. Nixon, Ronald Reagan and George Bush. Some of these
experts regard the idea of an American Century to be elusive or illusory, others
see it as benevolent or belligerent. As an example of the author's range of
characters, he labels Mr. Iacocca a "car salesman" playing the role of an
"industrial statesman," while Ralph Nader, opposed to the Government's bailout
of Chrysler, is described as "a left-wing trustbuster in the Jeffersonian
tradition." The reader is seldom in doubt about which personality the author
prefers.

The notion of America as the symbol of freedom and exemplary values goes back to
Colonial times. In 1630 John Winthrop, the leader of the Massachusetts Bay
Company, told his fellow passengers on the Arbella that they had not sailed
across the Atlantic to find wealth but to build a "city on a hill." From John
Winthrop to Henry Luce to George Bush, and many others, the tone of America as a
superior nation has been evangelical: God's country.

Although the phrase "the American century" sounds simplistic and presumptuous,
Mr. Judis finds that some American visionaries did indeed define a greater world
role for the United States, though usually in less chauvinistic and more
acceptable language.

Theodore Roosevelt and progressive intellectuals like Herbert Croly, the New
Republic editor, and Walter Lippmann, the columnist, believed that the growth of
industry could be shaped to serve egalitarian ends.  President Franklin D.
Roosevelt linked World War II to the effort to secure the Four Freedoms (freedom
of speech and worship, freedom from want and fear) for people everywhere. Henry
Wallace, Roosevelt's Vice President before Harry S. Truman, called for a global
New Deal and the century of the common man.  The postwar Marshall Plan to
rebuild Europe began on President Truman's watch. During the Vietnam War,
Lippmann, Kennan and Fulbright argued against expanding the evangelical role of
the United States by military means. But Mr. Reagan's two terms in office
increased the influence of the religious right and revived the cold war's
evangelism.

In a chapter titled "George Bush and the Next American Century," Mr. Judis
writes that with the threat of Communism gone, Mr. Bush was "utterly unable to
articulate a new sense of America's purpose." In 1988, "emulating Reagan, he ran
on the hollow promise of retaining the American Century." When the 1992 race
started, "he began calling for a 'next American Century,' reducing Luce's call
to arms to a campaign slogan."

"Grand Illusion" even challenges the way President Bush has handled foreign
affairs. Mr. Judis maintains that while Mr. Bush was influenced by the
Realpolitik of Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger, "he had never tried to
reconceptualize America's role in the world." On domestic matters, the author is
even more critical: "As someone who had tried to span the different worlds of
upper-class Connecticut and nouveau-riche Texas, Bush had unusual difficulty
identifying with average Americans. As President, he seemed as distant from a
laid-off Chrysler worker in St. Louis as from a Kurd on the Turkish-Iraqi
border."

Comparing the first and last decades of the 20th century, Mr. Judis concludes
that the difference between the Republican Roosevelt and the Republican Bush
marks "the difference between the beginning and the end of the American
Century." The author says that in an economically interdependent world,
America's military power "is increasingly irrelevant" -- one of his opinions
that surely can be challenged. Even if a Pax Americana isn't possible, such a
view seems far-fetched in an armed world where tyrannical governments with
nuclear ambitions still exist.

As a polemicist, Mr. Judis makes no effort to be evenhanded about the
personalities in "Grand Illusion," which is why his book makes for such lively
reading.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John B. Julius (Susanne P. Sinclair Smith/Farrar, Straus &
Giroux)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Issues: Military Record;
Clinton Confronts Draft Record In a Frank Address to Veterans

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 25


Gov. Bill Clinton asked the nation's veterans today not to vote against him in
November because he did not serve in the military during the Vietnam War.

In an unusually frank discussion of an issue that has repeatedly troubled his
candidacy, the Democratic Presidential nominee called on Americans who have been
in uniform to "judge me fairly, because that's the American way."

"If you choose to vote against me because of what happened 23 years ago, that's
your right and I respect that," Mr. Clinton told several thousand members of the
American Legion gathered here for their 74th annual convention.

'Looking Toward the Future'

"But it is my hope," he continued, "that you will cast your vote while looking
toward the future with hope, rather than remaining fixed to the problems of the
past."

Shortly before Mr. Clinton spoke to the legionnaries, President Bush addressed
the group. He said nothing about Mr. Clinton, choosing instead to speak
generally about the nation's security needs and letting his own record as a
decorated World War II Navy pilot speak for itself.

Mr. Clinton's handling of his draft status has been a recurring issue in this
year's Presidential campaign, partly because of the political power of veterans
groups and partly because of the connotations of patriotism and good citizenship
it involves.

Selective-Service Rules

The Democratic nominee says that he, like many young men his age, played by the
Selective Service's rules in avoiding a war he opposed in good conscience. But
his critics contend that he disingenuously manipulated the system, misleading
draft officials and later failing to acknowlege that that was what he had done.

Mr. Clinton's plea for "fair" consideration in November, which he described as
"very personal," was patently designed to soften some of the harsh sentiments
that many veterans held toward him.

He received applause at several points, much of it at least as loud as the
applause received by Mr. Bush. But there was mostly silence when he addressed
the draft issue and when he asserted that he could be an effective military
Commander in Chief, much as two other non-veterans, Woodrow Wilson and Franklin
D. Roosevelt, had been.

The Arkansas Governor's speech was notable, too, for an assertion that he would
be "a good President for America's veterans," an assertion he backed up with a
litany of promises to push through improvements that veterans organizatons have
long demanded in health, job and education programs. He touched on just about
every program that people who have served in the armed forces hold dear, and
when he did there were cheers as well as applause.

Youth Programs Praised

"I honor the service of every man and every woman who has served our country in
uniform," he said. "As President, I will honor your service and sacrifice with
deeds, not words. You've earned nothing less."

Mr. Clinton's political opponents may well find an opportunity in such promises
to accuse him of pandering and trying to be all things to all interest groups.

In one passage of his speech, Mr. Clinton sought to ally himself with the
Legion, praising its youth programs and saying he had been a participant in one
as a teen-ager that imbued him with a desire "to serve America myself in the
arena of public service."

"I might not be here today if it weren't for the American Legion," Mr. Clinton
said. "I learned from the American Legion that being a citizen involves
responsibilities as well as rights -- including the responsibility to love your
country even enough to right its wrongs."

This observation seemed an effort by Mr. Clinton to explain his rationale for
avoiding the war in Vietnam, which he went on to say he strongly believed was
wrong.

Draft Record Cited

At the start of his speech, Mr. Clinton told the veterans that he owed them "one
final statement to set the record straight" on his handling of the draft.

Breaking no new ground on the issue, he said he received a draft notice in 1969
but signed up with a Reserve Officers Training Corps program to avoid immediate
induction. But shortly thereafter, he continued, he decided to take his chances
with the draft.

The nation was in the process of instituting a lottery system and he drew a
number high enough -- 311 out of 365 -- to insure that he would never be called.

"If my number had been called, I would have served, and gone to Vietnam if so
ordered," he said in conclusion today. "But I won't lie to you. I was relieved
when I saw my number was 311 -- not because I didn't want to serve my country,
but because I believed so strongly that our policy in Vietnam was wrong. I still
believe that. It weakened and divided America. I know many of you disagree with
me. I respect that."

While Mr. Bush did not directly comment today on Mr. Clinton's draft
controversy, the Bush-Quayle campaign issued a statement charging that
throughout 1992 there have been "discrepancies" in Mr. Clinton's comments about
what happened back in 1969. The campaign statement asserted that at one point
Mr. Clinton had said that it was "simply a fluke" that he was never drafted.

Asked here after his speech about the Bush-Quayle charge of inconsistency, Mr.
Clinton replied, "No, I don't believe I've been inconsistent."

Bush in Friendly Territory

Speaking two hours before Mr. Clinton, Mr. Bush , in addition to recalling his
World War II record, spoke of his decisions to stand up to Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega in Panama and President Saddam Hussein in Iraq, urging the veterans to
trust him with the nation's security.

Beginning with his introduction by Dominic C. DiFrancasco, the Legion's national
commander, who called Mr. Bush a "comrade in arms" and "a highly honored veteran
of World War II," it was clear that the President was on friendly territory.
Wearing a black legionnaire's cap, Mr. Bush cited every example he could muster
about his military service and his nearly four years as Commander in Chief.

Asserting that his leadership was still needed to keep America safe, he told his
audience: "The Soviet bear may be extinct, but there are still plenty of wolves
in the woods. Renegade rulers, outlaw regimes, madmen we simply cannot allow to
get a finger on the nuclear trigger.

"You have my word: This President will never allow a lone wolf to endanger the
security of the United States of America."

While Mr. Bush was warmly received, the response was not wildly enthusiastic.
Nevertheless, his address came off better than it did four years ago, when he
made a slip of the tongue before the same convention in Louisville, Ky. It was
Sept. 7, and he said, "Today is Pearl Harbor Day," only to correct himself a few
moments later.

Today the crowd erupted in laughter as Mr. Bush said: "Four years ago, I met
with you as Vice President: Sept. 7 -- a day that will live in infamy. O.K., I
wanted to say it before you did. What does it take to live something down with
this crowd?"

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton each addressed the 74th
annual convention of the American Legion yesterday in Chicago. Mr. Clinton wore
a "distinguished guest" ribbon given by the veterans' group. (Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times; Associated Press) (pg. A1); Gov. Bill Clinton helped conduct a
band outside the Chicago Sheraton Hotel and Towers before addressing the
American Legion convention. (Associated Press) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 990 words



International A3-12

NEW PEACE PROPOSALS BY ISRAEL
Israel gave Palestinian negotiators detailed proposals for limited Palestinian
autonomy in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip as Middle East peace talks
continued at the State Department.  A1

Israel tells Syria it will now talk about the Golan Heights.  A10



Baghdad said to regroup its aircraft above 32d parallel.  A10

The King's illness and war are the talk of all Jordan.  A11

U.N. report sees some hope for a Cyprus settlement.  A12

MORE VIOLENCE IN GERMAN PORT
The Baltic seaport of Rostock saw its third night of violence by neo-Nazis who
want to drive out refugees seeking asylum in Germany.  A3

Polls find French deeply divided as European referendum nears.  A3

SWEDEN FREES C.I.A. DEFECTOR
The only former Central Intelligence Agency officer to defect to the Soviet
Union was released from Swedish custody and immediately left for an undisclosed
country, most probably Russia, frustrating attempts by Federal law enforcement
authorities to force him to trial in the U.S.  A7

Travails of the British royal family take on a new twist.  A12

SENTENCE, THEN RELEASE IN CHINA
China sentenced an economist to three years in prison for counterrevolutionary
crimes and then released him for time served.  A6

BALKAN FACTIONS STILL AT ODDS
Leaders of the many factions in the former Yugoslavia go to the negotiating
table in London with what are essentially irreconcilable positions on all major
issues.  A8

Lord Carrington resigned as U.N. envoy in Balkans.  A8

IMPEACHMENT CALLS IN BRAZIL
Demonstrations demanding the impeachment of President Fernando Collor de Mello
erupted in 24 cities as Brazilians reacted to a report accusing the President of
profiting from the activities of a multimillion-dollar influence-peddling ring.
A9

U.N. FORCE URGED FOR SOMALIA
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali recommended a U.N. force of 3,500 to
escort relief supplies in Somalia, where millions are in desperate need of food.
A5

National A14-19, D20-21

ANDREW RAGES ONWARD
The toll of lives and property lost to one of the century's most powerful
hurricanes climbed in South Florida, even as the storm barreled into the
Louisiana coast.  A1

Southern Louisiana waited, in fear and reverence.  D20

In East Texas, a 50-mile-long line of fleeing residents.  D20

A DAZED FLORIDA TRIES TO RECOVER
Amid mounting public impatience and vast confusion, the authorities of South
Florida struggled to restore food, water, electricity and other basic
necessities.  A1

Many in shelters now wonder: What is next?  D21

The rare circumstances that produce a hurricane.  D20

ANOTHER REVERSAL FOR BUSH
A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that the gains the President had reaped
from the Republican National Convention had now almost completely evaporated.
A1

Bush portrayed the Democrats as environmental extremists.  A18

Reporter's Notebook: On the road with Quayle.  A18

NEW IRAN-CONTRA FINDING
Iran-contra prosecutors disclosed in legal papers that they had found a
provocative hint that as Vice President, Mr. Bush might have embraced secret
arms sales to Iran more enthusiastically than he has publicly acknowledged.  A14


Clair George's jurors again reported a deadlock.  A14

'JUDGE ME FAIRLY'
Addressing delegates of the American Legion, Governor Clinton urged that his
lack of military service during the Vietnam War not be a factor in veterans'
decisions about his Presidential candidacy.  A1

SENATOR'S LINK TO B.C.C.I.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah worked behind the scenes on behalf of B.C.C.I.
while pressing the bank to make a $10 million loan to a close associate.A1

RAGE IN IDAHO
To hear supporters of Randy Weaver tell it, the man holding off police officers
and Federal agents from his mountaintop Idaho cabin is not a violent racist but
a hero.  A14

WOMAN SLAIN IN EDUCATOR'S HOME
A young woman awaiting trial on explosives charges was shot to death by the
police after breaking into the campus home of the University of California's
chancellor.  A14

The Marine Corps chaplain backed the anti-gay policy.  A16

Education Page B7

New Hampshire votes to rescind minimum state education standards.

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

For the determined, the search for a rare taste of Senegal.  C1

At dinner with Rob Morrow.  C1

Have backyards supplanted parks? Survey says no.  C1

Wine Talk C10

Health Page C12

How to get to sleep without sleeping pills.

Personal Health: When to treat suspected Lyme disease.

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Head over heart in Salzburg.  C13

Film: "Storyville." C13

Music: Black Crowes.  C13

Word and Image: Networks to show a child-abuse program.  C13

Sports B8-13

Baseball: Yankees beat Brewers.  B9

Column: Chass on Vincent and Tribune Company.  B9

Football: Giants' Banks comes back to camp.  B12

Jets' Kelly returns after going AWOL.  B12

Hockey: N.H.L. compromises on fighting.  B9

Horse Racing: Mare has chance to be Horse of Year.  B9

Obituaries D22

Raymond R. Corbett, a New York labor leader.

Justice Worrall F. Mountain; served on New Jersey high court.

Gen. Clyde D. Eddleman, an ex-Vice Chief of Staff of the Army.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Mr. Bush, crossing the line.

Chemical ban needs global aid.

School board's AIDS obsession.

Topics: Quayle's Constitution.

Letters

Phil Donahue: Infidelity is a valid campaign issue.

David Boren: The world needs an army on call.

Cindy Rizzo: A family life much like yours.

Claire L. Gaudiani: Dirty tricks for scholarships.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Criticizes Clinton as Hard On Car Industry

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: CANTON, Mich., Aug. 25


President Bush ventured into the backyard of the American automobile industry
today to depict his Democratic rivals as environmental extremists whose policies
would throw hundreds of thousands of Michigan residents out of work.

Under rain clouds at an outdoor rally in this township that is home to both laid
off General Motors workers and affluent executives, Mr. Bush strongly criticized
Gov. Bill Clinton's support of a proposal to raise automobile fuel efficiency
standards to 40 miles a gallon by the turn of the century from the current 27.5.
He also contended that the Governor had started with a bad environmental record
in Arkansas and then moved too far in the other direction.

"He's gone all the way over from that lousy record now to becoming bright
green," Mr. Bush told thousands of cheering supporters at the Canton Township
Heritage Park west of Detroit. "He's turned that bright, and if Clinton has his
way, Michigan auto workers are going to be turning green with illness."

Citing figures from a motor vehicle industry group, Mr. Bush said that in
Michigan alone, "40,000 workers would go from the assembly line to the
unemployment line if we go from those ridiculous standards."

Going After Gore Book

Acknowledging that he does not usually single out Senator Al Gore of Tennessee,
Mr. Clinton's running mate, Mr. Bush said he could not help himself today. While
Mr. Clinton has praised Mr. Gore's best selling book, "Earth in the Balance:
Ecology and the Human Spirit," Mr. Bush recited passages from it that he said
were distressing.

Ridiculing "this famous book now that Governor Clinton talks about," the
President went on: "On page 325 of the book, he makes an interesting comparison.
He says that the automobile industry -- and I quote right here, quotation,
'poses a mortal threat to the security of every nation, that is more deadly than
that of any military enemy we're ever again likely to confront.' That is Mr.
Clinton's running mate talking about the auto industry that means so much to our
country."

Still mocking Mr. Gore's book, Mr. Bush then said: "And one page later, he calls
for the 'elimination of the internal combustion engine.' What kind of people are
we dealing with here?"

In a telephone interview from Ohio, where he was campaigning, Mr. Gore chuckled
when told that the President was reciting from his book.

"This is simply one more effort by the self-proclaimed environmental President
to divert attention from his total economic and environmental failure," he said.
"What the auto industry needs is not political posturing but a strong economy
and money in the pockets of consumers who can then purchase new cars and
trucks."

Mr. Gore also disputed Mr. Bush's figures about jobs that would be lost under
the Democrats' proposals, saying there have been 250,000 jobs lost under the
stewardship of the Bush Administration, with another 600,000 lost in related
industries.

In another effort to portray the Democratic ticket as extremist, the President
alluded to the bus trips Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore have taken around the country.
"So when that Clinton-Gore bus goes off the left side of the highway onto the
shoulder," he said, "we've got to guard against that, too."

With Bush campaign aides describing Michigan as a crucial battleground in
November, Mr. Bush found a receptive site for his warnings about tighter fuel
standards. The Congressional district that includes Canton has 25 plants of the
Big Three auto manufacturers, and Michigan has one of the highest unemployment
rates in the country, 9.4 percent in July.

Mr. Bush flew into the nearby Willow Run Airport in Ypsilanti, and his motorcade
rushed by a sprawling plant that General Motors recently announced it would shut
down, possibly next summer, leaving an estimated 4,000 workers without jobs.

The President came to Michigan for his offensive on the environment after what
he billed as a nonpolitical stop in Chicago this morning at a convention of the
American Legion.

At that appearance, his aides passed out literature critical of Mr. Clinton's
record regarding the Vietnam-era draft, while Mr. Bush stayed above the fray.

In a break from his pattern since the Republican Convention last week, in which
he has attacked members of Congress at virtually every stop, the President
praised a Democratic Congressman, Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, a
friend of his who has long been close to veterans.

But he was not kind to Democrats here. As supporters wielded brooms with signs
reading "Clean the House!" and opponents waved pink slips, Mr. Bush took on the
Congressman here, Representative William D. Ford, chairman of the House
Education and Labor Committee, for opposing his education proposals.

"I'm a little tired of Congressmen that talk one way in Michigan and vote
different in Washington," the President said, his voice rising in anger. "I'll
give you an example. One of those Democratic leaders that blocked this new
proposal in education is named Congressman Ford, Bill Ford. He has stood against
school choice and just about every education reform I have put forward. And
what's worse, Governor of Arkansas agrees with him."

Turning to international affairs, Mr. Bush pressed on: "You want to stand up to
a Baghdad Bully like Saddam Hussein? Governor Clinton waffled. Congressman Ford
said, 'no way.' I say 'yes.' "

In another attack on the Democrats, Mary Matalin, the deputy campaign manager,
distributed to reporters a four-page "counter-rebuttal on Clinton's tax-and-fee
record." The paper was a defense of criticism of the Bush campaign's list of 128
purported state tax increases under Governor Clinton. It said, among other
things, that it was "grossly dishonest" for the Governor to call Arkansas a
low-tax state.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush greeting supporters yesterday at the Canton
Township Heritage Park in Canton, Mich. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Fear Returns to Sidewalks of West 96th Street Along With Homeless Man

BYLINE: By EBEN SHAPIRO

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 830 words


For the residents of West 96th Street, the quiet of summer was shattered last
week with the news that Larry Hogue was back on the streets.

Since 1985, Mr. Hogue, a homeless man who the police say becomes violent when he
smokes crack, has been a frightening fixture for the residents of the Upper West
Side neighborhood.

Mr. Hogue has been arrested nine times since 1972, for offenses ranging from
assault to attempted murder for allegedly pushing a young girl in front of a
school bus on Amsterdam Avenue. He was acquitted of the attempted murder charge
after a trial in 1988 and has not been convicted of any crimes serious enough to
keep him off the street for longer than a year.

Prosecutors say that Mr. Hogue, 48 years old, is mentally ill because of a head
injury sustained when he served in Vietnam. And on Sunday, after being arrested
for scratching a car with a knife, he was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center for
psychiatric tests.

But people in the neighborhood fear that he will soon be back. "The neighborhood
is living in absolute terror," said Lisa Lehr, a longtime resident of West 96th
Street. "There is no question that there is a homicide waiting to happen," said
Mrs. Lehr, who is an auxiliary police officer and has been active in efforts to
get Mr. Hogue off the streets.

Residents, police officers and even advocates for the homeless say that Mr.
Hogue has become a terrifying symbol of the difficulty of getting a mentally ill
and dangerous person off the streets.

Diane Sonde, director of Project Reachout, a program for the homeless on the
Upper West Side, said the situation was not uncommon. "It is a constant
nightmare that's not fair to anyone, the client or the community," she said.
"There needs to be something on the books that covers these people."

The Legal Aid Society, which has represented Mr. Hogue in the past, had no
record of representing him in the latest case.

The District Attorney's office has taken a keen interest in Mr. Hogue's case and
assigned a high-level prosecutor to monitor the case.

"How can a society get itself in a position where all you can do is wait for a
fellow to commit a more serious crime?" said Paul Shechtman, the prosecutor. "He
seems to have fallen through every crack in the system."

A person can only be hospitalized involuntarily if two doctors agree that the
person presents an imminent danger to himself or a danger to society.

Mr. Shechtman said the problem is that Mr. Hogue, who has been briefly committed
several times, only presents a danger to himself or society when he is high on
cocaine. After a few days in jail, when the drugs "clear" his system, Mr. Hogue
is calm and eligible for release, he said. "You have the worst of a vicious
cycle," said Mr. Shechtman.

The latest round of problems began last week, when Mr. Hogue was released from
an eight-month sentence he received after smashing a car window with a part of a
stone bench that he ripped out of a lobby of an apartment building. Just as he
did after other short prison terms, Mr. Hogue returned home to 96th Street. Most
of the time he lives in doorways from West End Avenue to Central Park West, but
favors the blocks between Columbus and Amsterdam, the police said.

'He Is Very Threatening'

He quickly ran into trouble. He was picked up on Saturday for acting in a manner
that would endanger him or others, the police said, and was later released. On
Sunday, he was arrested for scratching a car with a large knife. He was
arraigned Monday in criminal court and was ordered to be held in Bellevue to
undergo psychiatric tests. The results from the tests will be presented at a
hearing on Sept. 21.

By all accounts, Mr. Hogue presents a menancing figure on the streets. He is 6
feet tall and weighs well over 200 pounds, the police said. Capt. Liugi Iocco,
who heads the 24th Precinct, said: "He's a big individual. He is very
threatening."

The captain said Mr. Hogue was an aggressive beggar who had assaulted several
people though none seriously. He also has been arrested for setting fires and
breaking church windows, the police said. He has been sentenced to prison six
times since 1984, with the terms ranging from five days to a year.

Residents Feel Frustrated

Captain Iocco said his officers and residents were getting increasingly
frustrated by the inability to keep Mr. Hogue off the streets.

"He's been in the system so many times, it's hard to explain why he is still out
there," he said.

Mrs. Lehr and others are worried that nothing will be done about Mr. Hogue until
he commits a serious violent crime.

Law enforcement officers say Mrs. Lehr's concerns are valid. "He has the
potential to be dangerous," said Captain Iocco. "This thing is driving me crazy.
For three years, we've been chasing this guy all over town."

Mrs. Lehr doesn't feel completely safe, even with Mr. Hogue locked up for the
moment. "This happens each time," she said. "We have a sense of deja vu."

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larry Hogue, a homeless man who prosecutors say is mentally ill,
has frightened many residents on the Upper West Side with his history of violent
crimes. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
A Fond Look at the Little Lights of the Big City

BYLINE: By Douglas Martin

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words


"OH, you're the guy who writes about the small stuff," a real estate tycoon said
to me last week.

That kept grating. But I let go of it on Friday night, as my wife, Suzanne, and
I treated ourselves to a sunset sailboat ride in the harbor. As rose-colored
hues gave way to darkness, New York seemed a jumble of monumental cliff houses,
lights twinkling in airborne caves like a million diamonds. It seemed so
impossibly big.

As the water lapped against our boat, the Statue of Liberty loomed almost
palpably close. I thought of Charlie DeLeo, a caretaker who is Miss Liberty's
official Keeper of the Flame. The wounded Vietnam veteran begged for the job. "I
believe my heart and her heart are entwined," he told me a couple years ago.

Charlie's story was small, I guess. But not his heart. He made $24,000 a year
but had given more than $50,000 to charity, and had once gone in debt $1,500 to
help a needy family. He had donated 111 pints of blood.

He lived in a Brooklyn apartment with scant furniture, having given most of it
to the Salvation Army. His one clumsy stab at love, with a worker at the Statue,
had ended badly. She had left him her cat, Chico.

Charlie's story was compelling, quirky, poignant and maddeningly incomplete --
pretty much par for the course for me. For nearly five years, I have prowled
this defiantly ungraspable metropolis trying to capture, if not the essence of
things, at least what I hoped would strike a responsive chord. Smiles, sobs and
sniffles, in O. Henry's phrase -- the ephemera that add up to lives.

I have felt like a kid with a Mason jar chasing fireflies. You just hope some of
the indescribable glow remains discernible when you show your prizes to others
-- in my case, in the form of an 800-word column.

What a wonderful experience to be one of the dozen or so people who have written
"About New York" over the half century it has existed. Sometimes, in some ways,
it all seems light years removed from my small-town Iowa beginnings, but then I
remember something Willie Nelson told me:

"People are pretty much the same, it's just that some of them know the joke, and
some don't."

The jokes -- and more than just the ha-ha kind -- have been many, as have the
people who got them. As I pass this magnificent baton, I can still feel the
sheer existential thrill of leaping into ice-cold water with the Coney Island
Polar Bears. And I can hear the words of Eddie Pizzaro, who escaped a
drug-ridden East Harlem background to become a master of the ancient art of
stone-cutting at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine. "We're not all perfect,
but we can do something perfect," he said.

The thing about New York is that it is too big, too complicated and too fast for
people to keep up. By the time you figure out what you think of Woody and Mia,
they will be ancient history. Here, you have everything, it's all happening at
once, and pity the rube who doesn't know what he wants the second the deli man
asks.

Shuffling through my old columns makes even me dizzy. Here's an artist who keeps
scores of rare parrots for inspiration. There's the Libyan Ambassador to the
United Nations insisting that some of his best friends are Jews. And I've got to
think old Joe Lobosco is still on the job, powering his creaking bulldozer over
the trash at Staten Island's Fresh Kills Landfill, the world's largest garbage
dump.

As poverty, plagues and despair have grown, I have talked with some of the
multitudes thrust aside. Children paralyzed by bullets told the saddest of
truths.

"People don't see you no more," Benhard Carlette said.

Pinball wizards and priests, hookers and Holocaust survivors, rhinestone cowboys
and rabbis, welfare mothers and the Saudi billionaire Adnan Khashoggi -- not to
mention the retired milkman who carried the golden memory of personally
escorting Elsie the Cow to the Waldorf-Astoria in a grand 1947 publicity stunt.

These are my characters, and God how I have loved them!

Not that I have forgotten the news.  For example, during the Persian Gulf war, I
went to an all-night prayer vigil at the Cathedral, visited a shelter for
homeless veterans from other wars, talked to a man still plagued by his Vietnam
War duty of notifying kin that a loved one was dead.

And I met with a Bronx woman who was homeless, sick and alone except for her
17-month-old son. She imagined what her husband, an Army private in Saudi
Arabia, would say if he were by her side. " 'Listen, Carmen, don't worry,' " she
guessed. "Then," she continued, "we would start talking, and then we would break
down in tears."

Occasionally this column has told small stories behind big ones. When Joel B.
Steinberg was being tried for killing his adopted daughter, Lisa, I spent a
morning in a coffee shop -- it seemed like a century -- with Michele Launders,
the child's natural mother. She sat through Mr. Steinberg's entire trial.

She showed me a snapshot of Lisa's grave. "God's Angel," it said. She said she
lay awake every night, trying to make sense of things. "But that will never
come," she said. I pray she was wrong.

And exactly a quarter century after 38 law-abiding citizens in Kew Gardens,
Queens, watched Kitty Genovese killed from their windows, I wandered back to the
neighborhood.

"There is no death that has come since that can compare to it," Bruce O'Connor,
who owns Bailey's Pub beneath what was Kitty's apartment. "It is the point we
look back to and say, 'That's where things changed -- the beginning of the end
of decency.' "

Disintegration, a relentless spin toward chaos, these have been unavoidable
themes. Some losses have been lesser than others: I lamented the passing of
places to buy a cigar or pawn a possession. Others are greater: I mourned the
death of the city's oldest bookstore and the soulless absence of the great
liners from the Hudson River.

But the greatest, most bitter loss has been among our children. I've been to
Halloween parties for kids with AIDS, spent time in the adolescent unit at
Rikers Island. I visited Thomas Jefferson High in East New York a year before
people were killed in the halls.

"We're talking about kids who are eating and sleeping death," Carol Beck, the
principal told me.

I, the father of two wonderful young boys, cried on potter's field on Hart
Island as I watched prisoners burying pine coffins the size of shoe boxes, each
holding a baby. "It's good they're getting buried and not thrown in a garbage
pail," said an inmate, the father of eight.

What keeps you going is the continuing miracle of the human spirit. Lisa
Bilotti, who died of cancer at the age of 20, had everything. She grew up in
Rome, Paris and an elegant Fifth Avenue apartment. She was loved. "We lived for
this child," her father said.

Well before she knew she was sick, Lisa led her private-school friends in
raising $8,000 for the Make-a-Wish Foundation, which grants the last wishes of
terminally ill children. Hers was a Yorkshire terrier puppy, which later
scurried around her parents' childless apartment as they somehow answered my
questions.

There is not room to tell you about all my New York heroes, though I have
written about many. But does anybody remember Margaret Grossman of Queens? At
88, she walked more than two miles to the geriatric home where she volunteered
to help people much younger. Then she walked home.

Enough, already. For myself, let me just announce in this, my last column, that
I have found the answer to Alice's question. The pleasure of making a daisy
chain is indisputably worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies.

Thanks to a great big city full of great small stories.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Aide Who Quit Calls Yugoslav Policy Ineffective

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


The State Department official who managed the United States' day-to-day policy
toward the Balkans said today that he resigned in protest over what he called
the Bush Administration's "ineffective" and "counterproductive" response to the
fighting in the former Yugoslavia.

"What's going on in Bosnia is genocide, and the U.S. had a moral obligation to
stop it," the former official, George D. Kenney, said in a telephone interview.
"The Administration is not dealing seriously with the Yugoslav crisis. The
things we've tried up to now haven't worked and we need to try some different
approaches."

Mr. Kenney resigned from the Foreign Service on Tuesday. His departure and
criticisms were first disclosed in The Washington Post today.

The former official, who is 35 years old, joined the Foreign Service in 1988 and
had been acting chief of Yugoslav affairs for the last month, after having
served as deputy chief since Jan. 31. He reported to policy makers, but was at
the senior working level of the State Department bureaucracy.

Mr. Kenney said that "the risks of a Vietnam quagmire in Yugoslavia are vastly
overblown" and that the United States and its Western allies should arm the
poorly equipped Bosnians so they can reclaim territory lost to Serbian attacks.
He also recommended air strikes against Serbian positions.

"In the short run, it would increase the violence, but in the long run it would
decrease the violence," Mr. Kenney said. "It's more destabilizing to allow the
Bosnians to be murdered."

Limits of U.S. Involvement

President Bush has pledged American air support, if requested, to help deliver
relief supplies to Bosnia and Herzegovina, but he has repeatedly ruled out
punitive air strikes against Serbian targets or sending American ground forces
to the region.

Mr. Kenney predicted that an international conference under way in London to
discuss the Yugoslav crisis would most likely fail without strong pressure
against the Serbs, including the threat of military action.

He charged that the Administration's Yugoslav policy lacked urgency. "It boils
down to a cold, political calculation," he said. "The Administration decided
that it's far away, Americans don't care about it, and it's too politically
risky to get involved in."

In the interview, Mr. Kenney criticized senior Foreign Service officers for not
challenging their superiors to take a more active role.

"After 12 years of the same kind of Republican administrations, the senior
levels of the career officers have been so well trained in political obedience
that no one wants to rock the boat," said Mr. Kenney, who said he last
registered as a Republican.

There were indications that other career Foreign Service officers, including
some middle-level officials above him, sympathized with Mr. Kenney.

Indications of Support

"A lot of people share many of his views, particularly on the lack of action in
response to this growing crisis," one State Department official said. "But many
people also feel that it is naive to place the blame on career State Department
officers who are carrying out the President's policy."

The State Department colleague said that Mr. Kenney, while not a Yugoslav expert
by training, was hard-working and committed to improving the plight of the
people caught in the civil war.

"He was trying to push for a more activist approach, and was more willing to
contemplate U.S. engagement," said the American official, who added that Mr.
Kenney was particularly concerned about famine and other hardships this winter.

The State Department issued a short statement today in response to Mr. Kenney's
resignation, but did not address his policy criticism.

"We certainly understand his frustration in dealing with this crisis and the
many horrors that have occurred in the former Yugoslavia," said a Department
spokeswoman, Nancy Beck. "It's an enormously complex problem and one we've found
through all of our efforts and those of the international community is not
easily solved. We've been making strenuous efforts and will continue our efforts
to try to stop the killing and try to help those in need."

At the conference in London today, senior State Department officials suggested
that Mr. Kenney's resignation was a misplaced gesture. "If this is an expression
of frustration, everybody is frustrated with it," an official said.

                             --------------------


Bush Backs Duty-Free Trade

WASHINGTON, Aug. 26 (Reuters) -- President Bush invoked his executive authority
today and approved duty-free trade for all the former Yugoslav republics except
Serbia and Montenegro. In light of "the Balkan nations' ongoing political and
economic reforms, I have determined that it is appropriate," Mr. Bush told
leaders of Congress.


LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sarajevo was hit yesterday with its heaviest bombardment of
rockets and mortars in weeks. Bodies were laid out at the morgue in Sarajevo.
(Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The Awlful Choice on Bosnia

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


The Bosnian "peace" conference under way in London has the earmarks of deadly
farce. Western leaders make tough noises about standing up for principle -- the
principle of not legitimizing Serb conquests in Bosnia -- and prepare to set up
a long-term negotiating process. Meanwhile they know that their efforts will not
work, or work in time, to stop Bosnian Muslims from being slaughtered or driven
into refugee camps.

Their game at the conference is to evade the real and alarming choice: Either do
what they can militarily and economically to back up their principles and save
lives that way; or accept Serbian demands for partitioning Bosnia along ethnic
lines, strike the best bargain they can, and save lives that way.

Bush officials duplicitously pretend otherwise. President Bush and Acting
Secretary of State Eagleburger insist they will not reward Serbian aggression
and will settle for nothing less than restoration of the rights and territory of
Bosnian Muslims. Yet they know that nothing they are doing, or plan to do, will
bring this about.

George Kenney, the Yugoslav desk officer in the State Department, declared as
much Tuesday when he resigned from the Foreign Service.

Western Europe's policy is no less cynical than Washington's. European leaders
say they are beginning a new chapter in the Yugoslav peace process, one that
will take several months to show results. Yet they understand full well that
there will be little left of the Muslims in Bosnia several months hence.

Winter arrives early in the Balkans, as Europeans are well aware. Soon it will
entomb the hundreds of thousands of ill-clad and unhoused Muslims.

This real policy choice of which I speak is deeply troubling to me. It is doubly
disturbing because I and others have argued for months for Western leaders to
take steps that had a decent chance of avoiding the present trap. All in vain.

Western leaders answered with the worst sort of cynicism and duplicity. As
public disgust over Serbian horrors mounted, they tried to quiet the uproar by
flying in food for the Sarajevan victims (though doing nothing for the countless
others in remote parts of Bosnia). Even as they fed the dying, they secretly
seemed to hope that the Muslims would give up quickly so the whole mess would go
away.

Then the Western leaders tried to sell the phoniest of arguments. They
maintained there were only two choices: massive ground force deployments and
thus a Vietnam-like quagmire, or what they were already doing, i.e. feeding
victims.

In fact, there were and are lots of options short of dispatching ground troops.
(Ironically, it was the U.S. that toyed briefly and idiotically with the idea of
sending 100,000 troops to protect relief convoys, and verged on sliding into
another quagmire.)

Months ago, Western leaders could have put U.N. monitors on the Greek and
Romanian sides of their borders with Serbia. This would have sharply reduced
trade with Serbia and made U.N. sanctions far more effective.  Months ago, they
could have begun proceedings to charge Serbian and Croatian leaders with war
crimes and launched nonstop negotiations to apply constant world pressure. Only
in recent days and weeks have they acknowledged and just begun to act on these
options.

There is still more they can do, short of land war, to force the Serbs to think
again. They can threaten air attacks against military targets in Serbia, like
airfields and bridges to Bosnia. They can threaten to arm the virtually
defenseless Muslims -- and Albanians in Kosovo, if necessary -- to discourage
Serbia from spreading its policy of "ethnic cleansing."

Western leaders have not been without means to influence events in the Balkans.
They have chosen to ignore and deny those means, for reasons (fear of runaway
separatism in Europe, impending elections?) we are all free to speculate about.
Nor will they explain why they will use air power in Iraq and not in Bosnia.

Now, in conscience, they must decide on a clear course. If they have no
intention of taking tough action immediately, they should stop posturing about
principle and strike the best deal possible with Serbs to save Muslim lives. Or,
far preferably, they should do all they reasonably can to honor principle and
save lives.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SERBIAN OFFICIALS BACK WIDE ACCORD

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 27


An international conference on the former Yugoslavia adjourned tonight with an
agreement by Serbian leaders to lift the siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian
cities, dismantle detention camps and turn over heavy weapons to United Nations
forces. But doubts were immediately raised on whether they would actually carry
out the commitments.

The meeting also converted itself into a full-time conference that will resume
next week in Geneva under the leadership of Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary
of State who is representing the United Nations Secretary General, and Lord
Owen, who today was named the European Community's chief negotiator on the
Balkans, after the resignation of Lord Carrington on Tuesday.

Barely an hour after the conference adjourned, British and American leaders
acknowledged that they were gambling on Serbian compliance to the new
agreements. The Serbs at the center of the dispute -- Slobodan Milosevic, the
President of Serbia, and Radovan Karadzic, the leader of Bosnian Serbs -- agreed
today to a complex regimen of principles and actions.

But they did so with something less than grace. France's Foreign Minister,
Roland Dumas, told reporters today that Mr. Milosevic had quarreled with Milan
Panic, the Prime Minister of what remains of Yugoslavia, in front of the full
conference. And Mr. Karadzic said his Bosnian Serbs were not besieging Sarajevo,
so such strictures did not apply to him.

Eagleburger Expresses Doubts

"I don't have any particular evidence that he will live up to the bargain, based
on his philanthropic attitude," Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S.
Eagleburger said of Mr. Milosevic at a news conference tonight.

Defending the four documents issued by the conference this evening, Mr.
Eagleburger said the placement of human rights monitors and sanctions observers
all over the former Yugoslavia was intended to emphasize that Serbia would be
squeezed into compliance.

As for Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Eagleburger said that "he cannot be an independent
actor." The Acting Secretary said that he believed that Bosnian Serbs were
receiving support from Serbia. While refusing to go into details, he also said
Mr. Karadzic had been warned of the dangers of refusing to carry out orders to
surrender heavy weapons "within 96 hours" of a time that has yet to be
determined.

Among the diplomatic weapons the conference has at its disposal, according to
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General and co-chairman of
the session with Prime Minister John Major of Britain, was the possibility of a
war crimes tribunal.

"We cannot rely on the good will of the parties," Mr. Major said. "We need
pressure."

Mr. Major and others said the conference had laid down a marker for Serbia and
the Bosnian Serbs.

"The Yugoslav parties have pledged themselves in front of the world to a code of
conduct," he said.

According to conference documents, they also pledged to honor the borders of the
former republics, recognize the new governments in them and return territory
seized in recent fighting.

Mr. Eagleburger began his day today with a brief exchange with journalists over
the resignation on Tuesday of an acting State Department chief of Yugoslav
affairs, George D. Kenney.

"There is no question you have to have a great deal of sympathy for an officer
who spent hours every day dealing with what is clearly a very terrible and messy
situation," he said. But Mr. Eagleburger added that he, President Bush and James
A. Baker 3d, who just left the State Department to become White House chief of
staff, had to weigh the question of using force in the former Yugoslavia against
a number of other considerations.

"Essentially what some New York Times editorial writers and Mr. Kenney are
talking about is the use of force," Mr. Eagleburger said. "It is far too easy to
talk about some surgical strike or some particular military act, because the
consequences of that act have to be thought about."

He again raised the specter of Vietnam as a war in which the United States
became entangled in increments. Mr. Eagleburger continues to insist that if
sanctions are enforced, and the Danube is blocked against shipments of fuel and
other goods to Belgrade, Serbia and its irregulars in Bosnia will be unable to
carry on fighting.

The United States, which has initiated nearly all the sanctions against Serbia
and Montenegro, first acted in September 1991 by imposing an arms embargo on all
of the former Yugoslavia. In December, the Bush Administration stopped aid, and
canceled trade privileges and a textile agreement.

In May, the United States co-sponsored a Security Council resolution imposing a
trade embargo on Serbia and Montenegro, froze their assets abroad, ended air
traffic, reduced diplomatic relations and called for a general ban on
Serbian-Montenegrin participation in all international cultural, sports and
scientific events. The Administration began closing Yugoslav consulates in the
United States.

On Aug. 19, the Administration offered to send experts and logistical support to
Romania to police sanctions, which were being violated by smugglers and other
traders traveling to and from neighboring countries.

                             --------------------


Shelling Kills 3 in Sarajevo

SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Aug. 27 (AP) -- The fighting in Sarajevo
quieted today for the first time since the weekend, but mortar shells struck a
bread line and a cafe, killing 3 people and wounding 29. Women ran screaming
with their children, old men and women tripped over one another and blood
splattered over the bread being distributed.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Serbian leaders announced an agreement yesterday to lift the
siege of Sarajevo and other Bosnian cities. Radovan Karadzic, leader of the
Bosnian Serbs, spoke at a news conference in London. (Associated Press)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina, showing location of Sarajevo.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 126 words


BARBARA GARSON, the author of the Vietnam-era play "MacBird" and a longtime
member of the Socialist Party, got a message on her answering machine early in
August: "We're sorry to tell you that the Socialist Vice-Presidential candidate,
Bill Edwards, has died. We would like your help in writing a press release for
the newspapers. And also, would you like to run for Vice President?"

Ms. Garson at first thought the idea about being a candidate was a joke, but she
called back and learned that it wasn't. And so a week later, she agreed to be
the running mate of J. QUINN BRISBEN, the party's Presidential candidate.

"We don't expect to upset the election," Ms. Garson said yesterday in a
telephone interview from her Manhattan apartment.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Perot Drive Files Petitions for Ballot in New York

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


Carrying 65 cardboard boxes into the offices of the New York State Board of
Elections in Albany, supporters of Ross Perot submitted more than 90,000
signatures yesterday in an effort to place the Texas billionaire, who had
announced his withdrawl from the Presidential race, on the ballot in November.

Their efforts had garnered six times the number of signatures required by law.
"They came in about 10:15 this morning -- 65 boxes containing 90,965 pages with
a total of 91,085 signatures," a Board of Elections spokesman, David C.
Flanagan, said. "They needed 15,000 to get on the ballot," Mr. Flanagan added.

Mr. Perot, who announced on July 15 that he was withdrawing from the
Presidential race, has urged his volunteers to continue their efforts to get his
name on the ballot in all 50 states. "By staying together, they can be a very
powerful force," a Perot spokeswoman in Dallas, Sharon Holman, said of the
volunteers last week. "They will be the swing vote that will force the other two
parties to pay attention to Mr. Perot's economic plan."

On Ballot in 37 States

Although he has said it is unlikely that he would re-enter the campaign, Mr.
Perot is on the ballot in 37 states. He has submitted petitions, and is awaiting
their certification, in 9 other states, including New York. And yesterday, he
submitted a letter to the California Secretary of State, declaring that he is
still a candidate and designating retired Vice Admiral James Stockdale, a former
prisoner of war in Vietnam, as his running mate.

With the 91,085 signatures submitted in Albany yesterday, it seemed unlikely
that Mr. Perot's petition could be invalidated in New York.

David Garth, a political consultant, predicted that if the race between
President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton is close in New York, Mr. Perot's presence
on the ballot could be a factor. Mr. Garth said that because Mr. Perot's
departure from the race has helped boost Mr. Clinton in the polls, Mr. Perot's
place on the New York ballot might hurt Mr. Clinton more than Mr. Bush -- unless
Mr. Perot endorses Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Perot's presence on the ballot would also give New York voters the
opportunity to register their support for "none of the above" or to voice their
"displeasure with the system," Mr. Garth said.

At a rally in front of the State Capitol after the petitions were submitted,
about 100 volunteers cheered when Gail French, who managed the petition campaign
in Putnam County, said she hoped Mr. Perot would live up to his promise to
rejoin the race if he is placed on the ballot in all 50 states. "When we
complete our end of the bargain, we hope he'll complete his end of the bargain,"
Ms. French said.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

West Side Homeless Man Is Tentatively Ruled Ill

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


Psychiatrists evaluating Larry Hogue, a homeless man who has frightened Upper
West Side residents with his irrational, occasionally violent outbursts, have
tentatively concluded that he is mentally ill and should be committed to a
mental hospital for treatment, state mental health officials said yesterday.

The case drew wide attention this week after it was reported in The West Side
Spirit. Mr. Hogue's long presence in the neighborhood has raised questions about
why law enforcement and mental health authorities did not move more quickly to
get Mr. Hogue off the streets or make sure he received proper help.

Yesterday, an official in the Manhattan District Attorney's office said Mr.
Hogue got out of jail earlier this year because the bail was mistakenly set too
low. And the state mental health commissioner said a Veterans Administration
hospital that released Mr. Hogue earlier this year may have interpreted state
law on the involuntary commitment of mentally ill people too stringently.

Mr. Hogue, 48 years old, was arrested Sunday and charged with scratching a car
with a knife, the latest in a string of run-ins he has had with the law since
1972. In the most serious case, Mr. Hogue was convicted of pushing a 16-year-old
girl in front of a truck in 1988 and sentenced to a year in jail for recklessly
endangering her life.

Screaming and Begging

For many people who live around West 96th Street, Mr. Hogue's favorite haunt, he
has become a figure of dread and a symbol of one of the most aggravating facets
of city life: dealing with mentally disturbed street people.

He wanders aimlessly, yelling at strangers or aggressively begging, and he is
especially threatening when high on crack, say the police and residents.

Jeff Agrest, father of the girl who was pushed in front of the truck, said he
moved his law practice and his family upstate because the city does not protect
his family from men like Mr. Hogue. "This guy is street garbage," Mr. Agrest
said. "He's a crack head."

Mr. Hogue's court-appointed lawyer, Noel Ziegler, could not be reached for
comment yesterday.

Mr. Hogue is now undergoing psychiatric tests at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan.
Lorinda Klein, a spokeswoman for the city hospital, declined to comment on his
case. But Richard Surles, state Commissioner of Mental Health, said members of
his staff have talked to a psychiatrist working for Bellevue.

Brain Injury in Vietnam

That psychiatrist, he said, told state officials that the preliminary finding is
that Mr. Hogue is mentally ill and will need continuing treatment. Mr. Hogue's
mental illness is also compounded by a brain injury he sustained while serving
in the military in Vietnam. Mr. Surles said the state would accept him as a
patient if a judge orders his commitment at a hearing scheduled for Sept. 21.

On at least two other occasions, Mr. Hogue was psychiatrically evaluated after
being arrested, but neither case led to his being institutionalized.

In 1989, he was arrested for breaking a church window and charged with criminal
mischief, a misdemeanor, city officials said. Psychiatrists found him
incompetent to stand trial. But they also said he was not at that moment
dangerous to himself or others, so the charges were dismissed and he was
released.

This January, he was arrested for throwing a brick through the windshield of a
1987 Oldsmobile. At that point, there was a widespread outcry from residents
afraid that Mr. Hogue would quickly be back on the streets. That drew the
attention of Paul Shechtman, counsel to the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert
M. Morgenthau.

The psychiatrists found Mr. Hogue competent. While he was awaiting his court
date, he accumulated enough money from his veterans benefits to bail himself out
of jail.

Mr. Shechtman said Mr. Hogue's release was "probably my fault" for not having
asked that the bail be set for a higher amount.

Not long after he bailed himself out, Mr. Hogue was picked up by the police and
taken to St. Lukes-Roosevelt Hospital Center, which then transferred him to the
F.D.R. Veterans Administration Hospital in Montrose, N.Y.

"Within two weeks, the drugs were out of his system and he was back to being
relatively docile," Mr. Shechtman said. The hospital then released Mr. Hogue.

Alan Malter, assistant chief of psychiatry at the Montrose hospital, said state
law is so stringent that a person can only be committed to a hospital against
his will if he is an imminent danger to himself or others. Mr. Malter gave as
examples a person who is assaulting other people or walking in front of
onrushing cars.

But Mr. Surles, state commissioner of mental health, said the law is more
flexible. The court will accept as evidence the person's violent history, as
well as the psychiatrists judgment that the person could hurt himself or others,
he said.

After Mr. Hogue got out of the V.A. hospital, he pleaded guilty to throwing a
brick through the car windshield and was sentenced to eight months in jail. He
was released Aug. 14, and arrested a week later for scraping a car with a knife.

Mr. Shechtman said Mr. Hogue was acting much more bizarrely this week than he
did when he pleaded guilty in the broken-windshield incident earlier this year.

"He was shouting about my involvement in the Kennedy assassination," Mr.
Shechtman said. "What he was saying was sufficiently irrational that I was
moving, somewhat fliply, for a psychiatric evaluation for the reasons Mr. Hogue
himself had just articulated."

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Missing Someone? Red Cross May Help

BYLINE: By BARTH HEALEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46; Column 3; Style Desk; Consumer's World Page

LENGTH: 365 words


The American Red Cross channels food, medicine, clothing and shelter to the
victims of war and natural disasters. It also tries to heal the emotional strain
of separation, the kind of hurt that does not come through in television images
of the shelling of Sarajevo or in newspaper reports of starvation in Somalia.

Through the International Movement of the Red Cross and Red Crescent and through
Magen David Adom of Israel, the United States chapter tries to trace relatives
and friends missing in the republics that were once part of Yugoslavia and the
Soviet Union as well as in Somalia and other areas struck by famine, storms or
volcanic eruptions. Short personal messages can also be sent if a missing person
is found.

The procedure is simple: local Red Cross chapters provide a two-page form that
asks for biographical data on the person sought. Three copies go to the Foreign
Location Inquiry Service, American Red Cross, 18th and D Streets NW, Washington,
D.C., and then onward to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Geneva,
which channels them to appropriate chapters worldwide.

People in afflicted areas can reverse the process through local Red Cross and
Red Crescent representatives.

Message forms can be included in the request. These permit a 25-word message
that must be strictly personal in nature (rather than political or military) and
that is subject to being read by Red Cross personnel.

Responses can be very slow in coming. A third of the pending tracer requests
involve separations caused by World War II.

Moreover, the case load of the mostly volunteer staff in Washington has been
growing, more than doubling last year, to 3,427 requests, from 1,545 in 1990.

Other areas in which a large number of people are missing, besides Eastern
Europe and Somalia, are the Middle East, especially Iraq and Kuwait, and Vietnam
and Cambodia.

"The American Red Cross helps people find and reunite with their loved ones
because it is right," the group says in summarizing its work, and thus there is
no charge for tracing the missing or relaying messages. The Red Cross relies on
donations from the public to pay the costs of such inquiries.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 67 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 19 about photographs purporting
to show American prisoners of war still alive in Southeast Asia misstated a
detail about one of the prisoners, Maj. Albro L. Lundy Jr. Before the appearance
of the photographs, which the State Department considers fakes, no fliers with
genuine photographs of Major Lundy are known to have circulated in Southeast
Asia.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

International Gumshoe

BYLINE: By L. J. Davis;  L. J. Davis, a contributing editor of Harper's, writes
often on financial subjects.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4081 words


"It will probably be the most interesting thing we have ever done," says Jules
Kroll.

The world's most famous gumshoe is matter-of-fact about his company's latest
major international assignment: the Republic of Russia has hired it to locate
the money -- an estimated $6 billion to $8 billion in 1991 alone -- believed to
have been spirited out of the country by the directors of state enterprises when
they realized that privatization was inevitable. The Russian Government wants
Kroll to get the money back.

Wearing his trademark suspenders and holding, as usual, a cigar the size of a
small fire extinguisher, the 51-year-old Kroll looks like a successful
executive, which, of course, he is. The conference room in which he sits is
unabashedly corporate, with its black marble-topped table, gray walls, discreet
telecommunications center and forgettable artwork. The only signs of
individuality, in these nonsmoking times, are the huge crystal ashtray and black
cigarette lighter. Kroll's spacious corner office in mid-Manhattan is equally
corporate and anonymous, with the exception of the Dick Tracy handcuffs on the
console by the window.

It was during the anything-goes 1980's that Kroll came to be known as Wall
Street's private eye. Kroll's operatives were able to trace the large and
sometimes clandestine movements of money through so-called bank havens like
Luxembourg, the Bahamas and Grand Cayman Island, which had stringent secrecy
laws. As hostile takeovers and leveraged buyouts proliferated on Wall Street,
Kroll's people became adept at analyzing the creditworthiness of a possible
buyer and the true financial value of a proposed acquisition. They were also
able to detect illicit trading by investors who had obtained confidential
information. In short, as the financial game grew wilder, and a bewildering
array of junk bonds, bridge loans, payment-in-kind bonds and other money-raising
tactics were invented, Kroll's job was to inform his clients if the game was
worth the candle. It is an expertise that has been increasingly sought after by
foreign governments.

Fifteen Kroll operatives are on the Russian case. Joseph R. Rosetti, the vice
chairman and former chief of security for I.B.M., is in Moscow. So is E. Norbert
Garrett, a managing director and former C.I.A. station chief in Cairo and
Kuwait. The task appears to be a daunting one. Russia is a country with
primitive computer systems and complex, frequently falsified, paper work that
has a way of disappearing.

Although the investigation has begun in Moscow, Kroll says the most important
clues are locked in the records of Russia's foreign trading partners. Money,
when stolen in large quantities by white-collar criminals, always leaves a
trail, because the thieves have to disguise their thefts as legitimate
transactions and because they have to know where the money is hidden.

"We're going to be visiting and seeking records from Russia's major suppliers,"
Kroll says cautiously, "particularly in the food area and in oil-field
equipment. And we'll also be looking at major foreign importers, again mostly of
commodities. Outside Russia, commodities trading is highly computerized; records
exist." He permits himself a thin, detective's smile. "We will, of course, be
visiting these people and seeking their cooperation." (If he fails to obtain it,
the Russian Government can, of course, subpoena those corporate records.)

For some time now, there have been rumors that a great deal of the former Soviet
Union's gold is also missing. But on the subject of gold, Kroll will say only,
"There are some things I can talk about and some things I can't." He does reveal
he is being paid in scarce hard currency, which may be the nearly broke
republic's most profound tribute to his skills. Kroll's services do not come
cheaply. The firm will not release figures, but some observers say its minimum
fee is $1,500 per agent per day.

Like Pinkerton in its 19th-century heyday and the fictional Sherlock Holmes,
Kroll Associates has become a troubled government's natural choice when an
investigator is required to undertake a task beyond the abilities of its own
police and intelligence services. Kroll was hired by the Government of Haiti to
locate the hundreds of millions of dollars appropriated by Jean-Claude (Baby
Doc) Duvalier, the former President for Life, and its investigations led to the
seizure of bank accounts in New York, London, Luxembourg, Paris and Geneva. It
did pro bono work for the House Foreign Affairs Committee in ferreting out part
of the assets Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos concealed from the Philippine
Government. Closer to home, Kroll Associates has been involved in the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation's investigation of the $500 billion savings and
loan scandal, but Jules Kroll declines to discuss his company's involvement.

For more than a year, Kroll Associates has been engaged, on behalf of the
Government of Kuwait, in a search for the immense private fortune of the Iraqi
dictator Saddam Hussein. In a much-publicized appearance on "60 Minutes," Kroll
estimated Saddam Hussein's hoard, most of it stashed in Europe, at around $10
billion, a figure that others have since revised upward to at least $50 billion.

Last summer, Kroll Associates was in the news again. With a committee of the
Peruvian Congress as its client, it investigated allegations that Alan Garcia,
Peru's past President, might have stolen millions during his term of office, in
part using a branch of the now-notorious Bank of Credit and Commerce
International (B.C.C.I.) as his conduit. More recently, Kroll was engaged by the
investigative body of the Brazilian Congress to determine whether Paulo Cesar
Farias, President Fernando Collor de Mello's former campaign manager, might have
spirited millions of dollars out of the country.

When Kroll is not actively investigating an international cast of scoundrels, he
has occasionally been hired by them. Two weeks before his mysterious death, the
publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell summoned Kroll to his penthouse suite in the
Helmsley Palace in Manhattan and asked him to investigate the "dark forces" he
said were mobilizing against him -- "dark forces" that had nothing to do with
the publisher's increasingly suspicious creditors. At the time of his death,
Maxwell was working on a list of possible adversaries -- a list that,
apparently, has disappeared. With the Maxwell family crying poverty, Kroll
Associates is no longer on the case.

IF THE WORLD OCCUPIED BY Kroll Associates is sometimes under the spotlight, it
is more often than not wrapped in shadow. Kroll and its prime competitor,
Investigations Group Inc. (I.G.I.) of Washington, are widely regarded as the
gold standard of financial private detection, but few of Kroll's clients are
eager to show their faces.

Although Kroll Associates was conspicuously active on the Wall Street of the
1980's, the street's financial institutions are reticent about the private-eye
firm. Merrill Lynch refused to discuss the subject. A spokesman for Morgan
Stanley claimed that nobody in the company knew the faintest thing about Jules
Kroll or his company. An executive at Goldman Sachs said that although the
company had hired Kroll on occasion, he had no idea what they had done; the
lawyers had handled it. At Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, one of the
law firms in question, Arthur Fleischer Jr., the chairman, remarked that Kroll
was "very good at what they did," and there the matter rested.

The reason for such evasion is simple: Few companies are willing to admit that
they tried to sandbag an opponent with a private investigator, or that they had
to call on his services because they had been sucker-punched by a white-collar
criminal within their own ranks. And there are other compelling reasons for
calling in Kroll: the speed with which it works (as contrasted with the
overburdened police force) and its discretion.

Most of the work at Kroll Associates goes directly through 28 managing directors
in offices in Washington, New Orleans, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Miami, London
and Paris. There is a joint venture in Hong Kong. Recently, Kroll created a
consulting business in Eastern Europe with an established group, Planecon, which
is heavily weighted with self-exiled, former Communist-bloc economists.

Kroll himself might take a personal hand in three or four high-profile cases a
year. The Iraqi asset search was one; Russia is another. For Kroll, the Saddam
Hussein and Russian cases are heartening proof that, in the pared-down world of
the 1990's, his operatives would not have to make their living chasing
ambulances and crashing through the doors of hotel rooms with flash cameras.

There are now a few corporate investigative agencies -- notably I.G.I. and
Business Risk International (B.R.I.), based in Nashville -- but Kroll Associates
has remained dominant in the field. By the middle of last year, it was a $50
million operation, twice the size of second-ranking B.R.I.

Kroll Associates has often been described as having done much to purge the
investigative profession of a seedy image summed up in the mocking British
phrase: the "dirty mac brigade." It taps into a huge and growing data base, and
its immaculately dressed executives are top of the line. Besides Joseph Rosetti
and Norbert Garrett, they include Brian Jenkins, a former Green Beret and for 17
years the international crime and terrorism expert at the Rand Corporation, and
Robert J. McGuire, the former New York City Police Commissioner, who is
president of Kroll Associates. Such men are able and well connected. (At Kroll,
the managing directors are almost all male; the highest-ranking woman is the
head of corporate communications and a managing director, Alice T. McGillion, a
former First Deputy Commissioner in the New York City Police Department. Of the
company's 40 investigators, 10 are women.)

Kroll's corporate advisory board, dissolved in late 1991 in a cost-cutting
measure, consisted of similarly well-placed individuals and included former
Ambassador Angier Biddle Duke and President Bush's brother Jonathan. At times,
it is easy to forget that Kroll and his executives are, in fact, nothing more
than a bunch of private eyes.

UNTIL THE GLORY DAYS OF the 1980's, there had never been a business like Kroll
Associates. Almost anybody with rudimentary investigative skills can hang up a
shingle, call himself or herself a private detective and hope for clients. But
Jules Kroll made his name filling a new need. As Michael R. Milken, the junk
bond wizard, created financial titans out of thin air, the entrenched powers of
Wall Street came to a startling realization. They had no idea who these new guys
were, and they didn't know where the sudden torrent of money was coming from --
important points when one was attempting to judge the legitimacy and soundness
of a transaction.

Only a few years before, it was possible to find out about the people one was
dealing with through a phone call or a discussion at the club with a financial
counterpart one had known for years, or whose father one had known. But by the
early 1980's, the old boy network that had quietly policed the nation's
financial marketplace for half a century was no more, and the new environment
was very unsettling. To find out what was going on, Wall Street turned to Jules
Kroll.

An outsider was needed and Kroll's credentials were impeccable. He would be
investigating his own kind: the self-made, the obscure, the guys from the outer
boroughs who had not gone to the right schools, joined the right clubs or knew
how to choose a proper bottle of wine.

Long before he became the owner of a waterfront estate in Rye, N.Y., Jules Barry
Kroll was just another kid in Bayside, Queens, the son of a small-time printing
entrepreneur. In 1967, after acquiring a law degree from Georgetown Law School
(his undergraduate degree is from Cornell), Kroll joined the Manhattan District
Attorney's office. After a year, because his father was ailing, he entered the
family printing business, only to see it sold three years later. He was 30 years
old, out of a job but, he hoped, on the brink of a new career in politics.

A Kennedy liberal (Kroll was an assistant to Robert F. Kennedy, then the junior
Senator from New York, while attending Georgetown), Jules Kroll made a run for
the New York City Council in 1971, with the backing of such seasoned liberal
politicians as Robert F. Wagner Jr., Harrison J. Goldin and Robert Abrams. The
campaign met the same fate as most other attacks on the formidable Queens
Democratic machine of the 1970's. Kroll woke up on the morning after the
election with no job and many debts. The family car was repossessed.

He formed J. Kroll Associates, whose purpose was preventive auditing, or
purchasing control, a kind of police work in an industry where kickbacks, bogus
suppliers and price fixing were almost taken for granted. Kroll's task was to
keep the underlings of a company from stealing it blind and making sure that the
customer got what it paid for. An early client -- and for a long time, his only
client -- was Cadence Publishing, whose main product was Marvel Comics.

Kroll's knack for detective work was noticed. In 1979, Kroll Associates was
hired to help in the defense of two major companies. One was Diamond
International, a paper company then under attack by Sir James Goldsmith, the
Anglo-French entrepreneur. The other was Foremost-McKesson, a major distributor
of wine, spirits and pharmaceuticals that had attracted the unwelcome attention
of Victor Posner, the Miami corporate raider.

Sir James proved unstoppable, but Kroll operatives were able to help thwart
Posner by sending aloft an aerial camera, whose pictures revealed that the
raider was overstating the inventories at Sharon Steel, his primary vehicle for
the proposed takeover. This, among other questionable activities, called Posner
to the attention of the Internal Revenue Service, distracting him from his
quest. (Subsequently, a Federal jury in Miami convicted Posner of income tax
evasion.)

Suddenly, Kroll Associates, the corporate detective agency, was hot.

Corporations and government agencies had hired detectives often enough in the
past. General Motors, for one, engaged private investigators to look into the
personal life of Ralph Nader, when the consumer activist was publicizing the
shortcomings of G.M.'s rear-engine Chevrolet Corvair. But a detective who could
look at a potential investor and a pending deal and understand both -- that was
rare indeed.

Drexel Burnham Lambert, one of the more flamboyant investment bankers on Wall
Street, needed someone like Kroll. Drexel executives discovered early on in the
takeover game that when it came to due diligence -- discerning the difference
between a legitimate transaction and a cheap trick -- they weren't very good at
it.

"You need people who can assimilate different kinds of complex information very
quickly, analyze it and come back with creative ideas," says Terry F. Lenzner, a
Washington-based former civil rights lawyer and Watergate prosecutor who blazed
a distinguished trail of investigations himself before co-founding I.G.I.
"Lawyers simply aren't trained to do that, and most of them don't know how."

By 1984, takeover-related investigations constituted three-quarters of Kroll's
workload. But now and then, dirty hands and dirty mackintoshes were still called
for, and Kroll Associates engaged in practices that were occasionally
assailable.

A corporate raider like T. Boone Pickens was a tough opponent, but Pickens
claimed that calling members of his private club and trying to obtain damaging
information from his current and former employees constituted harassment. "We
were conducting a perfectly lawful investigation," says Daniel E. Karson,
general counsel of Kroll Associates. Pickens obtained an injunction in a Texas
county court, forbidding Kroll from continuing its investigation; the court
order was shortly thereafter thrown out, Karson says, by a Delaware court
because the judge saw nothing wrong with Kroll's line of questioning.

Kroll operatives were accused of impersonating a reporter and a police officer
while they were looking, on Goldman Sachs's behalf, into the affairs of Martin
A. Siegel, the investment banker then under Federal investigation for passing
along inside information. Jules Kroll denies this, although he concedes that
Federal officers asked his operatives to stop harassing Siegel on the telephone.
In James B. Stewart's book, "Den of Thieves," a Kroll operative was said to have
bribed the Siegel family's baby sitter -- which Kroll also denies.

In an unrelated case, Justice Vincent Poppiti of the Delaware Superior Court
forbade operatives from a Kroll subsidiary to conceal their identities and gave
them a script to follow when they conducted interviews.

JULES KROLL IS A GREAT believer in bringing diverse disciplines to bear on an
investigation. The case of the missing billions in Russia, for example, is
expected to require many skills, including the services of the more than 500
outside consultants (behavioral researchers and independent private
investigators among them) Kroll calls upon every year. This approach is used as
well in the bread-and-butter cases that make up the bulk of Kroll Associates'
business.

In investigating a routine white-collar crime, for example, Dan Karson, a
specialist in this area, might assemble a team that includes several
researchers, who would comb the enormous data bases, and a few investigators,
usually ex-police officers, to do the legwork. Like most Kroll managers, Karson
has the polished veneer of a business executive who happens to be a detective.

If the crime under investigation has been executed with sophistication, Karson
will call on Kroll's extensive staff of investigative accountants, who are
experts at detecting and analyzing intricate financial deceptions. And if time
is of the essence, Karson will employ the company's accounting SWAT team -- the
elite of the investigative accountants.

Well in advance of the changes in the marketplace, as the giddy 80's ended and
the sober 90's began, Jules Kroll began to diversify. Environmental detective
work is one developing area. It may involve nailing a company for dumping
nitroglycerine in the municipal sewage system, or discovering if a client's
prospective merger partner is doing so. Since the way in which companies had
disposed of their toxic waste some 20 or 30 years ago almost never complies with
today's laws, Kroll's operatives will find out, on behalf of various companies,
what other companies had used the same waste dump, so that they can share the
cost of the fines.

COMBATING urban terrorism is another new line of work.

On the afternoon of Sept. 9, 1991, a Monday, Howard Wallack, a senior vice
president of Laidlaw Transit, called the Kroll office in Los Angeles with some
arresting news: Three letters had been received, threatening to blow up
Seattle's school buses on Friday, the 13th. The letters had been sent to
Laidlaw, the principal bus contractor to the Seattle school district and a Kroll
client; to the school board, and to the local news media. The bombs, said each
of the letters, had already been placed in the buses' fuel tanks. The problem
was Brian Jenkins's to resolve.

By nature a scholarly and contemplative man who reads Suetonius for relaxation,
Jenkins has occasionally been bemused by the derring-do of the assignments that
have come his way. A decorated captain who served in Vietnam in the Special
Forces, his first task as a Kroll managing director -- on the night of a
reception in honor of his appointment -- was to lead the lightning raid on the
Phoenician Hotel and Resort in Phoenix. This lavish $300 million hotel was the
crown jewel in the empire built by Charles H. Keating, the savings and loan
executive who has since been indicted for fraud. Jenkins, a half-dozen other
Kroll operatives and the Phoenix police successfully secured the Phoenician --
and all its financial records and papers -- for the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.

In the Laidlaw case, the local police conducted the day-to-day investigation
while Jenkins had a team of behavioral experts examine the letters and draw up a
psychological profile of the letter writer. Jenkins also hired a group of
off-duty police officers to provide extra security for the Laidlaw buses.
Following Kroll practice, he also assembled a crisis team.

Kroll's experts and the Seattle Police Department concluded that the bomb threat
was a hoax, but there was no reason to treat it lightly. Laidlaw and its
unionized drivers were in the middle of contract negotiations. At the same time,
the city was tense over mandatory busing to integrate schools -- a particular
flea in the ear of the writer of the letters.

When a local television station broke the news blackout on the threats, the
Kroll team rolled out its crisis-control contingency plans. Meanwhile, Jenkins
went to work to discover if there were bombs in the fuel tanks -- an obvious
task but not an easy one, given the limited time.

"The buses were going to roll," Jenkins recalls. "Public attention was focused
on them, and the authorities reminded us that the bombs were at least
theoretically workable. Draining and disassembling the tanks in time was
impossible. Specialized X-ray equipment might not work and wasn't available
anyway. One of my colleagues, Mike Walt, a former F.B.I. agent with an
undergraduate degree in zoology and graduate degrees in endocrinology and
physiology, came up with an imaginative approach: How about an endoscope? If you
can insert a tube with a tiny lens to examine a human organ, why not a fuel
tank?"

After a little calling around, Jenkins came upon something called a borescope --
a device for inspecting the interiors of jet engines that was available from the
nearby Boeing Company -- that fit the bill exactly. No bombs were found. The
buses rolled on Friday with a minimum of disruption. Meanwhile, Laidlaw's fuel
was found to be contaminated with bacteria, holding out the possibility of a
profitable cleanup job for Kroll Associates' only subsidiary, Harrison/ Kroll
Environmental Services, based in New Orleans.

American International Group, the large insurance company, has engaged Kroll
Associates as a consultant in investigating international terrorism,
cross-border crime and product tampering. Earlier this month, Kroll bought the
Miami-based Palumbo Partners, which offers counterterrorist services and
publishes a daily report on international terrorism for its subscribers.

Computer and communications crime is another promising field for Kroll. With its
pioneering use of the latest computer technology in private investigation, the
company is well positioned to enter a field that is particularly susceptible to
the manipulations of the knowledgeable and unscrupulous.

"A law firm from the neighborhood called me," says Alan E. Brill, formerly in
charge of computer security at the New York City Department of Investigations
and now a Kroll technology specialist. "The administrative partner said he'd
gotten a phone bill from his long-distance company. It came in a box.  There
were pages and pages of calls -- to Colombia, to Ecuador. He's used to a bill of
around $4,000 a month. This one was $62,000. Unfortunately, the Federal
Communications Commission says that if this happens to you, it's your problem."
Brill told his client that to prevent a recurrence all he had to do was make a
simple change in the software of the office's computerized telephone system.

"In every technology," Brill says, "there's a dark side that the hackers and the
freakers of the world inhabit, and corporations never thought about the dark
side."

Over the past year, a brisk new business has also developed in something called
forensic accounting -- going back over the books of companies that were, in
effect, mugged by their own employees during the 1980's when the companies were
flush with money.

Today, business prospects look very bright indeed, and not just in the United
States. "Sophisticated fraud in the United Kingdom is on a sharp increase and
shows no sign of abating," says Patrick T. F. Grayson, a former British Army
intelligence officer who heads the London office.

Where business fraud flourishes, so does Kroll Associates.

NAME: Jules Kroll

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jules Kroll (pg. 46); Daniel E. Karson, general counsel of
Kroll Associates, is a specialist in white-collar crime. Like most Kroll
managers, he has the polished veneer of a business executive who happens to be a
detective. (pg. 48); Brian Jenkins, an ex-Green Beret in Vietnam who reads
Suetonius for relaxation, is an expert on international crime and terrorism. He
is sometimes bemused by the derring-do of his assignments. (pg. 50)(Photograph
by Dan Borris/Outline for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Executive Life;
Taking Midlife Crises On Two Wheels

BYLINE: By Mary Billard;  Mary Billard writes frequently about business and
legal issues from New York.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 23; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


A vigilant reader of the New York City Opera's Stagebill will find listed in the
small type under "Donors of Auction Goods and Services Valued in Excess of
$1,000" a number of corporate benefactors who cater to the needs of the pampered
classes: Bill Blass Ltd., Cal-A-Vie Spa, Cartier Inc., Christie's, Calvin Klein
Ltd., MGM Grand Air, Glorious Foods -- and Harley-Davidson of New York.

Verdi and hogs? Harley-Davidson, it seems, is mixing with an elite crowd these
days. For while Bruce Springsteen may have forsaken his odes to "suicide
machines," a core of upscale baby boomers are cruising wide open spaces to the
deafening roar of gunning engines -- or at the very least getting choice parking
spaces in front of chic West Broadway restaurants.

The latest fashion accessory for the well-heeled and middle-aged, motorcycles
are seen as much cooler than, say, ponytails on balding 40-year-olds. Bikes
transcend mere style. Biking is a sport, a therapy and a spiritual voyage all in
one.

"It is very cathartic," said Stephan Weiss. Mr. Weiss, husband and partner of
the designer Donna Karan, is introducing a beauty division at Karan. Biking is
an escape. "You are 100 percent focused when you are riding. It is not the time
to daydream. It is like a Zen experience. I never think I'm going to master the
machine."

Bernard Hyman, managing partner of Certilman Balin Adler & Hyman, a 32-lawyer
firm on Long Island, recently returned from a 20,000-motorcycle rally in
Lancaster, Pa. Mr. Hyman, who has ridden for more than 17 years, said he has
watched the sport go from blue collar to white. He is not surprised. "It is a
release from the anguish of work," he said.

Boomer bikers differ from death-defying highway rebels. They wear helmets. They
are mindful of the weather. A number in the New York City area even pay $350 to
take three days of lessons at Trama's Auto School in Queens in braking, swerving
and turning corners. "We get everybody," said the school's owner, Gasper Trama.
"Movie stars, businessmen and ladies. The age for first-time riders, nationally,
has gone up" -- to 38.5 years from 28, according to Harley.

Nan Schlosberg, a bike-riding psychotherapist in San Francisco, takes her
9-year-old daughter on trips. "Taking children on bikes is a serious issue, but
I want to share the experience with her," she said. "She has her own customized
leather outfit."

Asked to play amateur analyst, the self-aware boomer riders say one thing:
midlife crisis. "We are trying to recapture our youth," Mr. Weiss said.

Mr. Weiss frequently rides in the Hamptons with Harvey Cohen, owner of Weston
Paper in Manhattan and husband of Patti Cohen, a Donna Karan vice president. Ms.
Karan loves riding on the back of her husband's bike; Ms. Cohen won't even give
it a try. "It is a change of life," Ms. Cohen said of her husband's obsession.
"It could be another woman," she added, laughing.

Bob Pittman, the creator of MTV and now president and chief executive of Time
Warner Enterprises and chairman and chief executive of Six Flags Entertainment,
first rode as a teen-ager and started again several years ago, acquiring four
Harleys. He's down to three. (Pre-customizing, a limited-edition '93 Harley
celebrating the Milwaukee company's 90th anniversary costs about $16,000.)

Something of a thrill seeker, Mr. Pittman flies airplanes for fun, and rides the
Six Flags roller-coasters. "It is a great release from work; there is a
solitude," he said, making biking sound like a back-to-nature experience.
"Instead of a car -- which is a shell -- you are outside. You can smell the hay,
feel the temperature change, feel the wind."

Mr. Pittman recently went on a 10-day trip from New York to San Francisco with
14 other bikers, including Jann Wenner, editor and publisher of Rolling Stone,
US and Men's Journal. Overachievers, the gang rode more than 400 vibrating miles
a day. "I don't know why people are doing it," said Mr. Wenner, who rides a
Yamaha. "I don't have any big conclusions. It's a lot of fun."

A pop historian might trace the trend of executive as easy rider to the late
publisher Malcolm Forbes. "I was at Malcolm Forbes's chateau in France and Jay
Leno took me out," Mr. Wenner said. Mr. Forbes had started riding at 48. "People
think you're eccentric if you ride a motorcycle. Unless you're poor. If you're
poor they think you're nuts," he wrote in his book "Around the World on Hot Air
and Two Wheels."

Chuck Pfeifer, a former ad man, was another early biker about town. "It was me,
Mickey [Rourke] and the Hell's Angels," he said of the late 70's and early 80's.
"I was viewed as a crazy Vietnam vet."

Mr. Pfeifer, now part of a group opening a Manhattan restaurant called 1629
Second Avenue, speculated that "one reason more people are riding is because
Harleys have gotten better -- they used to be a bucket of bolts."

Whatever the reason, Mr. Pfeifer is sorry to see so many weekend warriors.
"Everybody is on a bike these days," he said. The Harley-Davidson dealership in
Long Island City could as well be selling Mercedes-Benzes.

But most boomer bikers don't care if they are part of a trend. Phillip
Schoonmaker, a principal with Shell Container, a designer and maker of cosmetic
packaging in Lake Success, N.Y., rode as a teen-ager until sidelined by an
accident. Now 44, he bought a Harley last spring.

"It is recapturing some of my youth," he said. "It gives you a sense of freedom,
even though you don't really have any."

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
A Contest of 2 Generations, Molded by 2 Different Wars

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1799 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 28


With both nominating conventions completed and the fall race begun, the 1992
election has emerged as a generational contest of unusual intensity and scope, a
choice between two men of two very different epochs, shaped by two very
different wars.

The 68-year-old George Bush may be the last President of the age of World War
II, the war in which every President since Harry S. Truman has served, excepting
Jimmy Carter, who was a midshipman at the United States Naval Academy during the
war. The 46-year-old Bill Clinton, born a year after that war ended, is the
first Presidential nominee of the age of the Vietnam war.

Peril for Both Candidates

Over this week and last, the old, unresolved differences between the time of
America's good war and that of its failed war have begun to occupy a place at
the center of the 1992 race, informing debates on matters ranging from party
ideology to personal morals.

It is, the events of this week showed, a discussion that holds peril for both
sides.

On Tuesday, Mr. Clinton had to stand before the American Legion and offer, as he
put it, "one final statement" on how he had come to not go to Vietnam. His
incomplete explanation left Republicans gleefully convinced that they have in
this issue the perfect means by which to portray the Democrat as a closet hippie
and a dishonest man.

Cooling on 'Family Values'

But the "family values" debate that is rooted in these generational politics,
and that the Republicans began with a great, angry to-do in their nominating
convention in Houston, appeared by this week to have very nearly backfired,
repelling as many voters as it had reached. By midweek, senior Bush
Administration and campaign officials had called for a cooling of the hot-button
talk.

The differences between the 1940's and the 1960's, and between Mr. Clinton's age
and Mr. Bush's, shape the way each candidate depicts the choice between them.

In the choice as portrayed by the Democrats, Mr. Clinton is John F. Kennedy, the
young, vigorous candidate poised to lead the country into an exciting (but not
radical) era of growth and change, a time of bold experiments in leadership. Mr.
Bush, in this picture, is an old, stuck-in-his-ways, golf-playing duffer,
incapable of seizing the historical moment. "Change" is the keyword of Mr.
Clinton's campaign.

In the choice as portrayed by the Republicans, Mr. Bush is Dwight D. Eisenhower,
the sober, sensible steward, shaped by the ways of the old, good days, and
imbued with the half-mythic values of those days. He does not promise so much to
induce change as to manage it, and he does not promise to make things better as
much as he warns that his opponent will make them a great deal worse. Mr.
Clinton, in this view, does not represent the promise of the early 1960's but
the traumas of the decade's later years; he is a secret radical hiding behind
the mask of moderatism. "Trust" is Mr. Bush's answer to Mr. Clinton's "change."

Nowhere is the generational contrast between Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton sharper --
and a cause of greater hope to Republican strategists -- than in the matter of
who did what in each generation's war. Mr. Bush, acting in a manner fairly
typical of the men of his class and time, was an officer and gentleman-hero of
his war; Mr. Clinton, acting in a manner fairly typical of the men of his class
and time, was a protester and an avoider of his.

Making Their Cases

On Tuesday, both men stood before the audience at an American Legion convention
and made cases for themselves that centered on just this matter.

"You know that I never served in the military," Mr. Clinton told the veterans.
"You know that I opposed the war in Vietnam. But I want you to know this: I was
never against the heroic men who served in that war. I honored their service
then, and I honor it still."

He went on: "If any of you here choose to vote against me because of what
happened 23 years ago, that is your right as an American citizen, and I respect
it. But I hope that you will cast your vote looking toward the future rather
than remaining fixed to the problems of the past."

Mr. Bush began by casting back 20 years before 1960 to, as he put it, "the world
we knew," a phrase that evoked remembered youth and old songs. "Fifty years ago
this summer, America is at war," he said. "At the age of 18, I went off to
fight. Like many of you, I was scared, but I was willing. And I was young, but I
was ready. And like so many of you, I had barely lived when I began to watch men
die."

Clinton Stressed the Theme

The generational theme began with Mr. Clinton; it has been present since the
inception of his campaign, when he spoke in October 1991 of an America "on the
threshold of a new era, a new millennium," and used the word "generation" four
times in the first six paragraphs.

At the Democratic convention in New York last month, Mr. Clinton imitated Mr.
Kennedy in a well-choreographed appearance in the convention hall the night
before his acceptance speech, and the biographical movie that preceded Mr.
Clinton's speech featured President Kennedy, in a moment heavy with
torch-passing symbolism, shaking hands with an awe-struck 16-year-old Bill
Clinton.

In their convention, and in the week since, the Republicans have sought to turn
this argument for generational change sharply against Mr. Clinton, by reminding
voters that he is not really of Mr. Kennedy's generation (Mr. Kennedy shared Mr.
Bush's war, not Mr. Clinton's) but Abbie Hoffman's, and to link the Democrat
with a decade remembered unhappily by many as a time when liberalism was turned
into radicalism.

In a convention speech that opened this effort, Marilyn Quayle said: "Much has
been said lately about the need in this country for a new generation of
leadership; that the moment has come for a couple of baby boomers to take the
helm of this great and complex nation; that the time has come for generational
change."

She then said, with Mr. Clinton clearly in mind: "Not everyone joined the
counterculture, not everyone demonstrated, dropped out, took drugs, joined in
the sexual revolution or dodged the draft. Not everyone concluded that American
society was so bad that it had to be radically remade by social revolution."

Broadening the Attack

Other speakers broadened the generational attack. Hillary Clinton, whom friends
at Yale recall as a committed leftist, and who has left a trail of legal
writings and involvement with advocacy groups that place her clearly closer to
the left edge of liberalism than her husband seems to be, was brought into play
as a sort of stand-in for Mr. Clinton. The suggestion in the Republican strategy
was that she represents the views Mr. Clinton secretly holds, too, but will not
admit.

The "family values" assault was generational, too, contrasting the warm appeal
of the idealized 1950's family as embodied in "Father Knows Best" with the
equally idealized depiction of single motherhood in today's "Murphy Brown."

This approach, on its face, would seem to offer promise for Mr. Bush and peril
to Mr. Clinton. It is, after all, rooted in fact. Mr. Clinton is a product of
his generation. He did demonstrate against the war, he has (sort of)
acknowledged smoking marijuana, and he has been the subject of much sexual
gossip. Most important, he did avoid the draft during the Vietnam war.

Clinton's Vulnerability

This last issue, which Republican strategists plan to make much, illuminates the
vulnerability Mr. Clinton faces in matters related to his generation.

In his efforts to avoid Vietnam, Mr. Clinton first worked his way through
academic deferments. When these were no longer available, and after he had
received an induction notice while attending Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, he
promised to join the Reserve Officers Training Corps at the University of
Arkansas. In the fall of 1969, after President Richard M. Nixon had announced
that draft-eligible students like Mr. Clinton could finish the school year
before induction, and proposed a lottery system to select inductees, Mr. Clinton
put himself forward for the draft. He drew a high number in the lottery and was
never drafted.

Mr. Clinton has said repeatedly that he exposed himself, however briefly, to the
draft because he felt it was the honorable thing to do. But on Dec. 3, 1969, two
days after the lottery showed he was safe, Mr. Clinton wrote an extraordinary
letter to the Army colonel who had supervised the R.O.T.C. program at the
University of Arkansas.

In the letter, he thanked the colonel for "saving me from the draft,"
acknowledged that he had misled the colonel about his intentions and views on
the war and said that he had "decided to accept the draft in spite of my beliefs
for one reason: to maintain my political viability within the system."

Changing Accounts

Moreover, the statements Mr. Clinton made about his wartime actions when the
subject first came up this year do not hang together well. He was quoted in news
reports in the spring as saying he had never received an induction notice, and
later as saying he was not sure. In his remarks to the American Legion, he
acknowledged having received the induction notice before signing up for the
R.O.T.C.

Speaking to reporters the day after Mr. Clinton spoke to the American Legion,
Charles Black, a senior political adviser to the Bush campaign, identified this
area as "an issue of huge vulnerability" that, he cheerfully admitted, he was
"trying to stir up interest in."

Mr. Black made it clear that the Republicans regard Mr. Clinton as vulnerable on
this issue not because he did not fight, but because Mr. Clinton's maneuverings
around the draft and his varied explanations of those maneuverings lend
resonance to the core Republican assertion, that he is misrepresenting his
generational self, hiding from the voters what he really stands for. "He has to
put this draft issue to rest and the credibility issues that surround it, and he
certainly didn't do it yesterday," he said.

Possible Strategy Weakness

But the appearances by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Bush before the veterans also
illustrates what may be a great weakness in the Republican strategy. Appearing
before a group of men who could be expected to be receptive to the Republican's
continuing attack, Mr. Clinton received a notably warm reception -- about as
warm as that accorded Mr. Bush.

Polls taken in the days since the convention have found a lack of interest among
voters in debating such things as the rights of homosexuals and the ways of
radical feminists. What the voters did seem to be interested in hearing about
was the economy, health care and crime. It may be that most people are finally
tired of fighting about who did what in the cultural wars.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nguyen Thi Dinh, the Senior Woman In Vietcong Ranks

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 42; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


Nguyen Thi Dinh, a leading figure in the Vietnamese Communist struggle against
the French colonial Government and in the American war more than a decade later,
died on Wednesday in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon. She was 72 years old.

Her death was reported from Hanoi yesterday by the Reuters news agency. The
cause was not given.

Vietnamese officials were quoted by Reuters as saying that Mrs. Dinh had been
the outstanding woman in Vietnam's modern history.

Mrs. Dinh was one of six vice presidents of Vietnam's Council of State, a sort
of collective presidency, having been named to the post in 1987. She was a
former member of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese Communist Party.

Ranking Woman in Vietcong

In the 1960's, Mrs. Dinh emerged as the senior woman within the Vietcong
insurgency against the American-allied South Vietnamese Government. She was a
member of the Presidium of the National Liberation Front, the political form of
the Vietcong.

The Soviet and Chinese press identified her as deputy commander of the Vietcong
guerrillas in 1965, at a time of large-scale American entry into the war.

Simultaneously, she headed the Women's Liberation Association, an organization
with village cells in areas controlled by the Vietcong.

Mrs. Dinh was believed to be a widow; details of her family life were not known.
She was born in 1920 in southern Vietnam, then part of French Indochina. In her
childhood, nationalist and revolutionary groups had started operating against
the French colonial administration. She joined one of them, the clandestine
Vietnamese Communist Party, at the age of 18. The authorities sent her to prison
for three years in 1940 because of her role.

Mrs. Dinh's body will lie in state in Ho Chi Minh City. She will buried there
tomorrow.

NAME: Nguyen Thi Dinh

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 30, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
Stumping With the Movies' Favorite Son

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2394 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


At breakfast in a Santa Monica diner, Tim Robbins puts down his fork, looks
across the table and, with demonic swiftness, contorts his face into a mask. Mr.
Robbins, the 33-year-old actor who is known for a small number but wide range of
characters -- from the flashback-troubled Vietnam veteran in "Jacob's Ladder" to
the morally vexed Hun in the slapstick comedy "Erik the Viking" -- is ordinarily
a bit of a manchild in appearance. Thin-shouldered and 6 feet 4 inches, he has
the gangly, startled look of a teen-ager unsure of what to do with his arms and
legs, and in spite of the gray at his temples, his face is downy -- it's
doubtful he could raise a convincing mustache -- and he has an actively elastic
mouth that seems to register a perpetual adolescent perplexity.

But in the moment that he abandons his avocado omelet for an acting
demonstration, a kind of steel emerges, and in an instant he's assumed the
oxymoronic quality -- "a puckish, commanding presence" -- that the critic
Pauline Kael found unique in him. His eyes perk up and glisten, his dimples
become pronounced and the skin around his mouth tautens as his smile becomes an
earnest, humorless, invincible grin. Utter charm with a tinge of malevolence --
it's the face of Bob Roberts, the ruthless senatorial candidate and title
character of the satirical film, opening in New York on Friday, that Mr. Robbins
wrote, directed and stars in.

"I figured he had to be, at all times, unperturbed and graceful and gracious,"
Mr. Robbins says of Bob Roberts. "Politician-esque. You know, 'I just love the
person whose hand I'm shaking.' They sure know how to smile, those guys."

In Hollywood, the city of image makers, Mr. Robbins has suddenly become the
chief image mocker, a man who conveys his suspicions of the status quo with
corrupt, paranoia-riddled portrayals of its leading representatives. Last
spring, he won accolades -- and a best-actor award at the Cannes International
Film Festival -- as the studio executive Griffin Mill in Robert Altman's
"Player," a sendup of the mindless pretensions of the film business. And now
there is "Bob Roberts," his debut as a screenwriter and director, which
generated significant buzz at Cannes and, during a compellingly screwy electoral
season in this country, earned unusual publicity for tapping into the national
spirit of mistrust.

"Bob Roberts" takes the form of an ostensible documentary, made by a British
crew, about the Pennsylvania Senatorial campaign of a folk-singing businessman
whose financial clout and knowledge of pop culture and the media have fueled a
dangerous political juggernaut. A self-described New Right rebel, Bob Roberts is
a slick, sloganeering reactionary who gives great sound bites and cloaks his
intolerance, greed and power-mongering with capitalist, jingoist, antidrug,
anti-welfare messages of uncommon vehemence.

The film tracks the campaign from the fabrication of Bob Roberts's public
persona to the mudslinging against the pragmatic, decent-hearted incumbent
(played by Gore Vidal), to a final dirty trick that rids Bob of the one pesky
journalist who refuses to buy into the heroic fairy tale. Along the way, it
offers not-so-subtle reminders of the embarrassments of the Bush and Reagan
Administrations (notably the Iran-contra and House banking scandals) and chides
-- well, blasts -- the media for its complicity in these events and for
cowardice in general.

The film is, at least in part, a left-leaning polemic, an update of the 60's
idealism that Mr. Robbins was raised on during his childhood in Greenwich
Village. (One of the recurring jokes in "Bob Roberts" is the candidate's
appropriation of quarter-century-old imagery from the heyday of Bob Dylan for
use in music videos and campaign ads.)

Mr. Robbins says his own political allegiances "lie somewhere in the film." But
to the suggestion that "Bob Roberts" is a stridently liberal piece of work, he
retorts, tight-lipped, "That's your opinion," and he points out, at some length,
that in the current political climate such convenient distinctions no longer
apply.

"What really gets me about labels, particularly liberal, is that all they do is
simplify the argument," he says. "I'm more interested in the unifying concept or
word than the divisive ones, the divisive ones being liberal, conservative,
Democrat, Republican. You know, what side are you on? Well, I'm on this side
sometimes and I'm on that side sometimes, but I don't want to be lumped in with
past perceptions of words like liberal."

Mr. Robbins is a more polished thinker than a speaker, and his speech, delivered
in fits and starts, is nowhere near as canned a policy statement as Bob Roberts
habitually makes on screen. Nonetheless this is the passionate rhetoric of
commitment, and it reveals qualities in Mr. Robbins that many of those who know
him cite as signal.

"When Tim talks politics, unlike a lot of people, he's still outraged by
things," says the actress Susan Sarandon, who has lived with Mr. Robbins since
they starred together in "Bull Durham" in 1989 and who recently gave birth to
their second child. "I don't know what's happened to our outrage, why people
don't seem to care anymore about things that affect them. But Tim is political
in self-defense."

Passion, outrage, anti-establishmentarianism -- for good or ill, these are
qualities often associated with youthfulness. And indeed, as he expresses his
skepticism about those in power, Mr. Robbins will now and then tread naively
close to paranoia or conspiracy theory.

For example, one day recently, sitting unrecognized in Venice Beach, he
explained why he opposes political polling and ended up sounding like a
politician himself.

"For one thing, any statistician can write any question to get the answers they
want," he said. "I don't know who they're calling. I've never been called. But I
know one thing. You have to be home to be part of this decision-making process,
and I'll tell you who's not home. People who are working two jobs, long hours.
Backbone kind of Americans. People who are home are rich enough to have the
luxury to be home. So who's making the opinions?"

Mr. Robbins came by his iconoclasm early. He was born in 1958, the third of four
children. His mother worked in magazine publishing; his father was a folk singer
who ran the Gaslight, a nightclub-cafe, and Tim was brought up on the musical
protestations of Bleecker Street's peaceniks and flower children. He is
currently living in the Village again, with Ms. Sarandon and their three
children (she already had a daughter when they met), but it isn't the same.

"I grew up around this wonderful weirdness," Mr. Robbins says. "There were
coffeehouses that were actually not re-creations of coffeehouses, where intense
social discussion was happening. It was a great place to live."

David Robbins, Tim's older brother, a composer who wrote the music for the songs
Bob Roberts sings (Tim wrote the words), recalls that life in the small downtown
apartment was boisterous and healthy.

"It was a very functional family," he says, somewhat apologetically. Dinnertimes
were talkative and family outings frequent. He describes the adolescent Tim as
"smart, quiet. He listened a lot. And whether it was street theater or street
hockey, he was always very focused."

Tim Robbins began acting at age 12, in street theater with both a political and
satirical bent. He remembers one skit, from the mid-70's, called "Haldeman,
Ehrlichman and Dean": "It was a musical number, and it involved these three guys
who kept on stealing from each other's pockets, pulling tape devices off each
other."

After graduating from Stuyvesant High School, he went west to college, to the
University of California at Los Angeles, where he formed an avant-garde theater
group, the Actors Gang, of which he is still artistic director.

"That was when I started getting into Surrealism and Expressionism, and how
those movements related to the world in which they were created," he says. "And
I started to see similarities between Weimar Germany and Reagan America."

He and an Actors Gang colleague, Adam Simon, have written three plays -- dark
satires all. The most recent, "Carnage: A Comedy," about the crackup of a
television evangelist, appeared to mixed reviews in New York at the Public
Theater three years ago.

Meanwhile, in another universe -- mainstream Hollywood -- a kind of parallel
career began to evolve in the mid-80's. Mr. Robbins appeared in "Top Gun" for a
nanosecond; his first real role was in "The Sure Thing" (1985), a sweet comedy
directed by Rob Reiner. His films since then have included "Five Corners,"
"Tapeheads," "Miss Firecracker," "Erik the Viking," "Bull Durham" (as a
muttonheaded ballplayer, his breakthrough performance), "Jacob's Ladder" and,
most recently, "The Player."

If "The Player" gave Mr. Robbins a major forum for his barbed humor and serious
outrage to exist side by side, and established him as, well, a player in the
film industry, then "Bob Roberts," which he brought in on a modest budget of $4
million, proves his mettle as a man in charge. There's a coming-of-age feel to
this sequence in his career.

The idea for the movie, Mr. Robbins says, grew out of his return to New York
from California in the mid-80's and his discovery that "something very
significant and sad had happened."

"Young professionals had really taken the Village by storm. It was like, uncool
people who wanted to live where it was cool. Meanwhile, a lot of what had made
the neighborhood such a great and interesting place had moved away. Bob was the
metaphor. He represented that concept to me."

In Bob Roberts's first incarnation, for a skit Mr. Robbins performed on
"Saturday Night Live" in 1985, he was a businessman. From there he progressed
through a variety of drafts to campaign spokesman and finally, after several
years of revisions, to the candidate himself. As Mr. Robbins describes it, it
was as though Bob Roberts found his political platform as Mr. Robbins found his
confidence and writer's legs.

"I think Bob Roberts was a lot like Ross Perot," Mr. Robbins says. "If I wanted
him to run, he'd run."

Viewers may find some of the satirical protest in "Bob Roberts" overzealous.
Nonetheless, it is a serious film that recalls other serious films -- Elia
Kazan's "Face in the Crowd" (1957), for example -- in its thematic condemnation
of demagoguery.

Mr. Robbins likes to cite Rob Reiner's mock rock documentary, "This Is Spinal
Tap" as an influence, and he admires the films of Frank Capra because "there
were always serious stakes for the characters in those comedies." He also cites,
as an inspiration more than an influence, Robert Altman's 1974 film "Nashville,"
which shares with "Bob Roberts" a scathing portrayal of a society where politics
and pop culture are interchangeable.

"I was 15 or 16 when I saw it," Mr. Robbins says, "and I remember feeling like I
had just seen the first film. It was an opera, an epic, you know? Disturbing and
funny and wonderful."

Mr. Robbins says he hasn't seen the film since, though in many ways in "Bob
Roberts" he seems to be consciously tipping his hat to Mr. Altman's movie. In
addition to the similar themes and comparable scores, there are a number of
shared particulars: for example, a scene in which Bob visits a black church and
appears amid the robed choir echoes the opening sequence of "Nashville," and in
the earlier film there is a British character (played by Geraldine Chaplin) who
is making a documentary.

Fittingly enough, Mr. Robbins is now at work in a new Altman film, "Short Cuts,"
which is based on a selection of Raymond Carver short stories. He portrays a Los
Angeles policeman whose marriage is collapsing.

The night before the first day of shooting Mr. Robbins attended a concert by the
wry country singer Lyle Lovett, a friend. Mr. Lovett had a role in "The Player"
and also appears in "Short Cuts."

After the show there was a gathering and Mr. Robbins stopped in briefly. Dressed
like a teen-ager in a baggy jacket and jeans and a baseball cap worn backward,
he looked a little preoccupied as he reached down from his gangly height to sign
a few autographs. He was thinking, he said, about the most striking moment of
the show, a jazzy, discordant cello solo that had dramatically hushed the crowd.

"Y'know," Mr. Robbins said. "I'd like to write a scene like that."

On location the next day -- a diner along a commercial strip of highway in
Downey, Calif. -- Mr. Robbins, in costume (leather jacket, polyester shirt and
cowboy boots), played a tensely comic scene in which his character takes his
mistress (Frances McDormand) out to lunch, hoping to discuss their relationship
but being derailed by the presence of her young son.

Cast and crew were jammed into one wing of the diner -- real customers were
eating meals not 50 feet away -- and everyone was tripping over cables and
lights. It was, nonetheless, a genial set, the kind Mr. Altman is known for. A
large, gray-bearded man with the look of a mischievous uncle, Mr. Altman sat
heavily in the dead center of the cramped quarters. Traffic ran with
intermittent ferocity outside, and there were several pauses for noise.

Finally, when Mr. Altman had what he wanted from the scene, he called lunch and
spoke for a bit about Mr. Robbins.

"The only advice I ever gave him was never to take any advice," said Mr. Altman,
an iconoclast of some renown himself.

"As an actor, he sees outside of himself, the big picture. I don't know whether
that's ambition or that he's a natural busybody." As a director, Mr. Altman
added, Mr. Robbins has an admirable sense of how to tell a story obliquely,
without conventional narrative scenes, a style favored by Mr. Altman himself.

"All the information is revealed in passing; it's all disguised," Mr. Altman
said.

After lunch, Mr. Robbins sits in his trailer. He's in a good mood, looking
pleased with himself. Does he get the idea that now is his moment?

"I guess I do get that sense," he says.

Well, then, isn't it ironic that the man who played Griffin Mill and Bob
Roberts, two guys corrupted by the hype machine, is about to ride the machine
himself.

"Yeah," he says, "it is."

Any danger that what happened to them will happen to him?

"You mean will I lose my soul?" he says. "Nah."

NAME: Tim Robbins

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article last week about Tim Robbins and his new
movie, "Bob Roberts," referred incorrectly to events during the Bush and Reagan
Administrations. The movie deals with the savings and loan banking scandal, not
the troubles of the House bank.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Tim Robbins, who starred in the Hollywood satire "The Player"
-- Among image makers he has become the image mocker. (Mojgan B. Azimi for The
New York Times); Mr. Robbins in "Bob Roberts" -- Charm, with a tinge of
malevolence. (Paramount Pictures); Greta Scacci and Tim Robbins in the Hollywood
satire "The Player" -- a forum for Mr. Robbins's barbed humor and outrage. (Fime
Line Features); In "Bob Roberts" Mr. Robbins ties into a spirit of mistrust.
(Paramount Pictures)(pg. 18)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Air France in Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 34 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Aug. 30


France's state-owned airline, Air France, said today that it would help Vietnam
overhaul its aging fleet of commercial planes and might take a stake in the
fledgling airline of the former French colony.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

'Stone Wrote Anti-American Propaganda';
Recruited Twice

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


To the Editor:

"Strange New Pals in the K.G.B." (editorial, Aug. 13) charges that Herbert
Romerstein and I became dupes of Moscow apparatchiks in reporting what a
high-ranking former K.G.B. officer told us separately concerning I. F. Stone.
You charge that we are victims of disinformation that is "not just repugnant but
grotesque" because we "thirst to believe" what we were told: that Stone was a
paid agent of the K.G.B. for many years.

Without bothering to check with either of us, you describe the evidence as
"remarkably nebulous," the chief source being "nameless, his allegations
uncheckable." We could have provided the names of other people, some of them
journalists, who know our source, could attest to his credibility and could tell
you that they heard from his lips what we reported he said about I. F. Stone.
Two other journalists were present when this source commented on the willingness
of the columnists Walter Lippmann, Joseph Kraft, Jack Anderson and the
Washington Post reporters Murrey Marder and Chalmers Roberts to use material
that he fed them as a Soviet Embassy official.

Can you provide equal verification for your Aug. 16 front-page report in which
nameless sources alleged 17 times, among other things, that the United States
was going to provoke a military confrontation in Iraq "to help get the President
re-elected"? Rather than denouncing this reliance on nameless sources making
uncheckable allegations, you based an Aug. 17 editorial on those charges
("August Surprise?"), reminiscent of the support you gave on April 15, 1991, to
Gary Sick's "October Surprise" allegations, which filled two-thirds of your
Op-Ed page and was replete with unnamed sources.

The charge that I. F. Stone was a Soviet agent does not surprise those who knew
that as a fellow traveler, if not a party member, Stone remained a faithful
Stalinist through the purges, the Hitler-Stalin pact and the absorption of
Eastern Europe. You might have cited his spreading the lies that the Korean War
began with South Korea invading the North and that the failed Vietcong Tet
offensive in 1968 was a crushing American military defeat as examples of his
criticism of "cold war orthodoxies."

When Stone died, you canonized him in an editorial, three signed columns and a
1,750-word obituary. Thirsting not to believe that he was a Soviet agent, you
dismiss the revelations of a highly credible K.G.B. source as "repugnant" and
"grotesque." Gen. Oleg Kalugin tells me that he told your Moscow correspondent
the same thing he has told other reporters who have interviewed him on the
record -- that he did not recruit Stone and did not pay him money. You
apparently construed that as a denial that I. F. Stone was the American
journalist General Kalugin described as a Soviet agent in a London talk. Not so.
Stone was originally recruited by someone else; General Kalugin rerecruited him.
Someone else paid him.

REED IRVINE
Chairman, Accuracy in Media
Washington, Aug. 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE STORM;
Food and Shelter Crises Ease But Diseases Pose Dangers

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1624 words

DATELINE: HOMESTEAD, Fla., Aug. 31


With food and other supplies flowing into the areas devastated by Hurricane
Andrew and temporary housing finally being erected, government and private
relief agencies say they now face a new crisis: the breakdown of hygiene,
sanitation and normal health care here.

Although the Homestead branch of South Miami Hospital was able to reopen today,
the rest of the half-dozen major hospitals in the disaster zone of south Dade
County remained closed. Makeshift clinics have been set up at schools and
community centers, but doctors and nurses have been so busy treating the
hundreds of injured who have come to them that few of them can spend time on
preventive medicine: going into the neighborhoods to tell people how to avoid
dysentery, heat prostration, diarrhea and other ailments.

Hundreds of doctors' offices were demolished in the storm. Most pharmacies were
also ravaged, and many patients have been unable to find their physician or
refill prescriptions.

After two days of heavy rains that left victims of the storm sodden, weary and
discouraged, the stench of rotting garbage and decaying food hung over much of
southern Dade County today. While delivery of food and water has been a
priority, removal of garbage and debris has lagged. Infestations of mosquitoes
and rats are becoming a problem, particularly for the thousands still living in
the ruins of homes that no longer have roofs, windows or four walls.

Flourishing in Filth

"At this point, we have to be on the alert for a whole range of diseases that
flourish in unsanitary conditions, from diphtheria and dysentery to malaria and
hepatitis," said Bill Carruthers, deputy director of an emergency medical team
brought in from St. Luke's Hospital in suburban Cincinnati last week as part of
the Federal Government's disaster assistance program. "These could begin to be a
problem in the next few days."

Dr. Joe Greer, director of Camillus House, a nonprofit medical center that
serves the poor of Miami and its suburbs, said he was worried about possible
outbreaks of salmonella, hepatitis, typhoid, the bacterium shigella, which
causes one of the several strains of dysentery, and other diseases that arise
any time "water is contaminated from fecal matter." In addition, he said,
doctors have reported seeing unusually high numbers of children suffering from
diarrhea, dehydration and ear and upper-respiratory infections.

Doctors and other medical volunteers stressed that they have not yet seen any
instances of major communicable diseases. For that reason, and because there
were no reported cases of typhoid or cholera here in the weeks before the
hurricane, the Centers for Disease Control said there was no need for mass
immunization against any infection.

Nonetheless, doctors say they are watching carefully for unusual patterns of
illness. "We are going to be more worried as the week goes on, because a lot of
infections have an incubation period, and people with cuts who walk in all the
slop that is out there are going to be showing up in a few days," said Dr. Barry
R. Weiss, an emergency room specialist who is a volunteer at a field clinic.

Dreading a Chain

Medical relief workers said they were paying special attention to the large
number of migrant farm workers from Latin America and the Caribbean who live or
work in Homestead and Florida City. Many have received little if any medical
care in their home countries, and thus are believed to suffer from a variety of
easily transmittable ailments, including intestinal parasites and perhaps even
cholera.

Medical relief workers said that, paradoxically, the sudden abundance of food
and water being sent to victims of the hurricane was now contributing indirectly
to public health hazards. As people resume their normal eating and drinking
patterns, they are defecating and urinating more often, but without being able
to use normal sanitary facilities, which were destroyed or damaged by the storm.

The authorities have begun installing portable toilets in the affected
neighborhoods. The United States Navy alone shipped 4,600 portable toilets to
Miami, and the roads south toward Homestead today were filled with convoys of
flatbed trucks hauling them.

The New Breeding Grounds

To prevent outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases like encephalitis and possibly
malaria, state authorities on Sunday began pesticide spraying in south Dade
County.

There are also growing concerns about rats and other disease-bearing vermin,
whose own food supplies were disrupted by the storm and which have begun turning
up in rubble and garbage dumps. Local radio stations are broadcasting appeals
for donations of rodent traps and pesticides, but the mounds of perishable
fruits, vegetables and meats that have built up in recent days continue to
attract flies and rats.

Some of the ill told harrowing tales of confusion and hardship. Rodney Buchanan,
a 42-year-old disabled Vietnam veteran from Cummings, Ga., who traveled to
Homestead to help distribute relief supplies, said he suffered a heart attack
Sunday afternoon after loading his van with supplies.

He was rushed to a field hospital in Homestead for initial treatment, he said,
and then was transferred to a hospital in Kendall, about 20 miles north. "I got
weak in the legs and had my heart attack," Mr. Buchanan said. "The only problem
was they were taking people up to Kendall and then saying, 'Bye.' And that's it.
I was left up there without a car, without my pants, without my glasses or my
wallet or anything."

The first physician Mr. Buchanan saw, he said, told him he would have to remain
in the hospital for 24 hours. After a shift change, though, a second doctor told
him he would be required to stay for three days and to pay a bill of about
$3,500. "I couldn't pay that," he said. "Hell, I didn't even have my wallet."

Mr. Buchanan made it back to Homestead. But today his van blew a tire while
traveling over the debris in Homestead's streets, and he said he had no idea how
or where to get it fixed.

"I can't find the school where the field hospital was," he said in exasperation.
"We've been going back and forth for about two hours just trying to find it but
getting sent one way and then the other by people who don't know where they are
or where anything else is. I don't have a wallet or glasses. My tire has blown
out. I want to get out of here. This isn't fun."

Medical Staffs Disrupted

Hurricane victims have been forced to turn to the emergency medical units
because most full-service hospitals like Deering Hospital, the largest in the
disaster zone, were severely damaged by the hurricane and remain closed.

"Most of our medical staff not only lost their housing, but lost their
practices, their medical offices," said Jamie E. Hopping, chief executive
officer of the hospital, which has 260 beds. "Most of our most sensitive
equipment was damaged by water, including a CAT scan, radiological equipment,
and laboratory, operating room and monitoring equipment. They're all out."

Ms. Hopping said she and other hospital administrators were focusing on
obtaining "medical space for our doctors," in the form of modular units, and
"opening two buildings for emergency care." The hospital will be able to offer
"some urgent care here this week," but she predicted it would be "60 to 90 days
before we start all our usual services."

All 153 of the hospital's patients were evacuated to other hospitals the night
of the hurricane.

Up Go the Tents

With concerns about sanitation and medical care growing, efforts to build
temporary housing took on a new urgency. At Harris Field, a municipal park here,
a United States Marine Corps unit began building the first of several "tent
cities" at 11 P.M. Sunday and was still busy at midday today.

"We want to get this job done as fast as we can so that we can get people in
here just as quickly as possible," said Cpl. Lauro Valles of the Eighth Engineer
Support Batallion, which was airlifted from Camp LeJeune, N.C. over the weekend.

Corporal Valles said the unit has erected similar tent settlements before, most
recently for Haitian refugees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the only thing that
made this mission different was that "we're not putting up barbed wire and
concertina to keep them in."

Allocating the Shelter

Throughout the morning, bedraggled homeless families occasionally approached the
marines asking for permission to take shelter in the tents. They were referred
to local civilian authorities, who will be alloting the space to those who need
it most and hope to begin moving people in early Tuesday.

Military spokesmen said the first two tent settlements being constructed here
would consist of 108 tents, each with 14 cots, for a total capacity of 1,512
people, plus a mess hall and shower and sanitary facilities. They added that the
supplies already on hand here include enough tents and cots to provide housing
for at least another 20,000 people.

Civilian officials, however, say that the toll of homeless left by Hurricane
Andrew approaches 250,000, many of whom are staying with friends or relatives
but will soon need longterm housing. Gov. Lawton Chiles said today that 85,000
homes in the Miami area are "unrepairable" as a result of the hurricane and will
have to be razed.

Even so, there was some grumbling among the intended beneficiaries of the tent
construction effort. "They wouldn't have to put up a tent city if somebody could
get plywood and building felt down here," Ronald Johnson, a retiree whose
trailer home was destroyed by the hurricane, said as he was helping distribute
ice this morning. "Nobody wants to live in a tent. People have homes, and they
want to live in them."

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The state authorities have begun spraying pesticide in areas
most diseases like encephalitis and malaria.; Dr. John Cowin treating a migrant
worker's 2-year-old daughter at a labor camp outside Homestead, Fla. (Alan S.
Weiner for The New York Times); Volunteers helping yesterday to unload portable
toilets at the Everglades Labor Camp.; State authorities have begun spraying
with pesticide areas most devastated by the hurricane to protect against
outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases such as encephalitis and possible malaria.
(Photographs by Lee Romero/The New York Times)












                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

White Supremacist Surrenders After 11-Day Siege

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Aug. 31


Randy Weaver, a white supremacist whose defiance of the law made him a hero to
hate groups in the West, surrendered to the authorities today, ending an 11-day
siege at his mountaintop cabin in the woods of north Idaho.

The standoff, which began with two days of gunfire that killed Mr. Weaver's
13-year-old son, Samuel, his wife, Vicki, and a deputy United States marshal,
William F. Degan, ended early this afternoon without a shot being fired.

"He just cried his wife's name, his son's name, and he stood up tall like a man,
and we marched tall down the road like we said we were going to," said James
(Bo) Gritz, a retired Army Special Forces lieutenant colonel who negotiated with
Mr. Weaver for several days.

The 44-year-old fugitive had vowed to die rather than turn himself over to the
small army of Federal agents, National Guard troops and police officers who had
surrounded his cabin atop steep cliffs in the Selkirk Mountains. Supporters of
Mr. Weaver, who taunted and cursed the authorities for the last week, have
accused them of overkill. A fugitive for 19 months, Mr. Weaver was wanted on
Federal gun charges.

His wife was killed on Aug. 22 but her body had remained in the cabin until
Sunday, Federal agents said. A longtime family friend, Kevin Harris, 24,
surrendered on Sunday. Mr. Harris was wounded in a gunfight more than a week ago
and is charged with killing the marshal. He is under guard in a Spokane
Hospital, where his condition today was listed as serious.

Although the standoff ended without violence today, the nearly two-year attempt
to arrest Mr. Weaver was a failure by the standards of the Marshals Service and
raised questions about how the operation was carried out. Mr. Degan's death
marked only the third time in more than a decade that a Federal marshal had been
killed while trying to arrest a fugitive.

The marshals have had Mr. Weaver under surveillance since February 1991, after
he failed to appear for trial on charges of selling two sawed-off shotguns to
undercover agents. The isolation of his cabin, and its perch atop cliffs, made
it difficult to safely approach the house, the agents said.

The marshals said they had not gone into Mr. Weaver's cabin and arrested him
earlier for fear of harming the children. But the worst came to pass, as not
only a marshal was killed, but Mr. Weaver's son and wife. Mrs. Weaver was shot
while holding her 10-month-old baby, Mr. Gritz said. The same bullet that
wounded Mr. Harris passed through his arm and hit Mrs. Weaver in the head,
killing her instantly, Mr. Gritz said.

Accounts of Shooting Differ

The family's version of the initial shootout on Aug. 21 is that they were acting
in self-defense, after being fired on by the marshals. The Marshals Service has
yet to provide a detailed account of the two gunfire exchanges, but the agency
has said that its officers fired only after being shot at.

After his surrender early this afternoon, Mr. Weaver was flown by military
helicopter to Boise, Idaho. His three surviving children -- Sarah, 16; Rachel,
11, and the baby, Elisheba -- were being examined by doctors. Among the
conditions of Mr. Weaver's surrender, said Mr. Gritz, was that the children be
turned over to a family friend.

Mr. Gritz, (pronounced GRITES) a candidate for President on the Populist Party
ticket, knew Mr. Weaver from their days in the Army Special Forces. Although Mr.
Weaver never went to Vietnam, he served as a Green Beret, according to his
military record. Last week Mr. Gritz became a go-between between Mr. Weaver and
the authorities. Federal agents had been unable to elicit a response from Mr.
Weaver.

His supporters, who numbered up to 100 at one time, had staged a vigil at the
roadblock leading up to the family cabin. An assortment of neo-Nazis, neighbors
and members of the Aryan Nations had rallied on his behalf. Mr. Weaver and his
wife were believers in a doctrine called Christian Identity, which holds that
Europeans are the lost tribe of Israel, that blacks are subhuman and Jews are
satanic.

Gun Sales Are Charged

The Federal authorities became interested in Mr. Weaver in the late 1980's, when
an informer told them Mr. Weaver wanted to sell guns to the Aryan Nations. Mr.
Weaver had been to the Aryan Nations compound several times but was not a formal
member, said Richard Butler, leader of the group.

Agents say they bought two sawed-off shotguns from Mr. Weaver in 1989. Mr.
Weaver was later indicted on two felony counts of making and possessing illegal
firearms. He was released on his own recognizance, then failed to appear for a
trial date in January 1991.

Mr. Weaver's supporters said he was being singled out because of his racial
beliefs, an assertion that Federal officials deny.

"You can believe anything you want to in this country, but it's when you start
getting involved in the trafficking of illegal weapons that we get concerned,"
said Jack Killorin, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, which conducted the undercover operation.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randy Weaver arriving yesterday in Boise, Idaho, escorted by
Federal marshals, after he and his family surrendered to law-enforcement
officials. His surrender ended an 11-day standoff at his cabin in Idaho.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Threat Only When on Crack, Homeless Man Foils System

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2160 words


Peering from their apartment windows, the residents of West 96th Street have
watched Larry Hogue's slow descent into madness. At first, he was just another
shambling homeless man who muttered to himself, slept barefoot in the snow and
ate from the garbage.

But over the years his behavior became more bizarre. He stalked a teacher as she
walked her fawn-colored Akita, and threatened to roast and eat the dog. He
dragged a raggedy chair into a busy intersection, leaned back as if he were
reclining in a chaise longue and munched a bagel as cars swerved around him.

He jumped on the hood of a red Jetta and banged on the windshield as a terrified
woman tried to pull out of a parking space. He heaved rocks through the vaulted
stained-glass windows of a landmark church. He knocked a schoolgirl into the
street, where she was almost struck by an onrushing truck.

Like Typical Horror Movie

Dozens of times, police officers in the 24th Precinct deposited Mr. Hogue in
psychiatric emergency rooms or jail cells, but each time, like some horror movie
cliche, he returned to his old haunts.

Mr. Hogue is among the growing ranks of mentally ill people who are also
addicted to drugs. His scary collision with the Upper West Side, a bastion of
upwardly mobile liberalism, has not only tested the tolerance of residents, but
has also offered an unusually detailed look at the failure of the mental health
system to help people like Mr. Hogue or protect the public, say his
psychiatrists, mental health experts and city officials.

Although he is an extreme case, Mr. Hogue represents the sometimes dangerous
fusion of two trends: the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill and the
rise of cheap crack cocaine.

Community Care and Money

Since the 1950's, when there were almost 90,000 patients in New York State
mental hospitals, the state has greatly shrunk that population. The goal was
community care, which critics charge has never been adequately provided. Even in
the last five years, under grinding budget pressure, the number of patients has
been almost halved, from 20,000 to 11,000. Critics say the state policy has left
the city to cope with the consequences.

Thousands of those living on the outside, especially the homeless, have turned
to crack and other street drugs that give an anguished mentally ill person a way
to feel intensely alive, unlike prescribed medications that can deaden
sensation, doctors say.

The disastrous results can be found in one staggering statistical leap: In 1985,
20 percent of the psychiatric patients discharged from public city hospitals
were dependent on drugs or alcohol. Last year, 41 percent had a "dual diagnosis"
of mental illness and substance abuse.

Men and women like Mr. Hogue cycle in and out of hospitals and jails. Programs
to treat their complex problems are still relatively scarce, officials say.
Under state law, people cannot be hospitalized against their will unless they
are legally considered dangerous to themselves or others. And mental hospitals,
under the gun to reduce costs, often release them when they stabilize,
researchers say. But once they leave the hospital, the drug addiction often
reasserts itself, fueling the patient's sickness.

"There's an enormous pressure to get people out of hospitals because they cost a
lot of money," said Elmer Struening, an epidemiologist at the state-sponsored
Psychiatric Institute. "They stay in the hospital until they simmer down. Then
they are discharged."

'He Was Pushed Through the Cracks'

This was the pattern with Mr. Hogue. He became psychotic when he smoked crack,
so the police took him to an emergency room. From there he was transferred to a
state hospital. Then after he calmed down, he was discharged to start the
destructive cycle again -- even though his records indicated he probably would
be back to the hospital again. Mr. Hogue is now under psychiatric evaluation at
Bellevue Hospital Center.

"Larry didn't fall through the cracks," said Michael Powell, a psychiatrist who
saw Mr. Hogue at least a dozen times at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in
the 1980s. "He was pushed through the cracks."

The portrait of Mr. Hogue that emerges from interviews with doctors, mental
health officials, the police and residents of 96th Street is of a man whose
troubles appear to have begun in Vietnam. He was struck in the head by a
propeller blade and suffered damage to the frontal lobe of his brain.

Mr. Hogue, now 48 years old, first went to jail and a state psychiatric hospital
in 1972. Over the next two decades, he was in and out of state hospitals about
20 times -- not counting many other stays in the psychiatric wards of Veterans
Administration hospitals, officials say. He also served jail terms ranging from
five days to a year for crimes of criminal mischief, gun possession and
attempted robbery, among others.

He first turned up on the Upper West Side in the mid-1980's. No one seems to
know why he made the undistinguished blocks of 96th Street between Amsterdam and
Central Park West his home base.

Lisa and David Lehr moved there from the New Jersey suburbs in 1985 and spotted
Mr. Hogue in the first hour. In winter, Mrs. Lehr set out meals of cheese,
crackers and milk for him. Sometimes, when he slept shirtless and barefoot on a
grate, she covered him with a wool blanket.

But he deteriorated as crack unhinged his sanity. A disabled veteran, Mr. Hogue
received about $36,000 a year in benefits, officials say, but did not spend the
money on shelter. Instead, residents say, he collected cash from a bank and
spent much of it to buy crack and other street drugs.

Mr. Hogue crouched behind cars, sneaking from one to another, with his arm
outstretched and his finger pointing like a gun, perhaps, residents thought, in
a flashback to Vietnam.

He seemed to have a special grudge against cars. He set fires under them and
stuffed rags in their gas tanks. He ripped off side-view mirrors, then wandered
into the street and shaved with a knife as he gazed at his reflection.

When the police took Mr. Hogue to St. Luke's, Dr. Powell said, the nurses and
doctors there would sigh and say, "Oh, God, it's Hogue again." Dr. Powell, the
director of the psychiatric emergency room there from 1977 to 1990, said: "He
just ran people ragged because he was such a pain in the neck. We were
uncomfortable restraining the guy, but if you didn't he was constantly into
stuff."

Dr. Powell said Mr. Hogue suffered from the brain injury, crack addiction and a
psychiatric illness that was hard to disentangle from the other problems. The
doctor said he believed that Mr. Hogue needed long-term hospital care, but never
got it because of the pressure to empty state hospitals.

Mr. Hogue was the kind of patient who could make life miserable on a hospital
ward, the doctor said -- an added incentive to discharge him. "He's ungratifying
to work with," Dr. Powell said. "He ruins your stats because he stays forever.
Every time he breaks something, there's an investigation. He's very high
overhead, so they export the problem to the streets."

Shoved Schoolgirl In Front of a Truck

In 1988, a 16-year-old girl was walking home from her private school when Mr.
Hogue came shadow-boxing through the intersection of 93d Street and Amsterdam
Avenue, punched her in the stomach and pushed her in front of a Con Edison
truck, said her father, Jeff Agrest, a real-estate lawyer.

The truck driver, who stopped in time, chased Mr. Hogue and the police took him
to a hospital. Mr. Agrest, enraged, wanted to press charges, but said the police
and the District Attorney's office told him not to bother because of Mr. Hogue's
mental state.

But the girl's mother, Susan Agrest, who had been a Newsweek correspondent for
many years in the city, called the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M.
Morgenthau, her husband said. Mr. Hogue was subsequently indicted on attempted
murder charges.

"Morgenthau's not frightened of an angry father, but of a reporter with access
to ink," said Mr. Agrest, so disgusted by the incident that his family moved
upstate.

Mr. Morgenthau said through a spokesman he had no memory of Mrs. Agrest's
intervention. At the trial, Mr. Hogue contended he had just bumped into the
girl. A jury convicted him of reckless endangerment and he was sentenced to a
year in jail.

When Mr. Hogue, inevitably, showed up again at St. Luke's Hospital after his
release from Rikers Island, Dr. Powell, aware of the truck incident, was worried
that Mr. Hogue would kill someone. The doctor said he wrote to the head of a
Veterans Administration Hospital and warned him not to let Mr. Hogue go again if
he was readmitted. The doctor also took the case to court and Mr. Hogue was
involuntarily committed to the Manhattan Psychiatric Center, a state hospital on
Wards Island.

"I did not want to be on the cover of The New York Post as the guy who let him
go," he said.

But the revolving door kept spinning. "When this guy's drug problems clear, his
psychosis seems to disappear," said Robert Spoor, spokesman for the state Office
of Mental Health. "When a person's condition no longer requires hospitalization,
we discharge him."

Alan Malter, assistant chief of psychiatry at the V.A. Hospital in Montrose,
N.Y., where Mr. Hogue was treated, declined to comment on the case, but speaking
generally about the issue, he said: "How long can a person be kept against their
will when their psychiatric condition is stabilized? Ninety days? A year? Five
years?"

On Jan. 5, Mrs. Lehr, an auxiliary police officer and community advocate, saw
Mr. Hogue bolt across 96th Street, carrying a slab of stone.

"With incredible fury, he rammed it through my car window," she said. "It not
only shattered the glass, it bent the frame."

Mrs. Lehr pressed charges and went to The Manhattan Spirit, a neighborhood
paper, which published a cover story headlined "The Wild Man of West 96th
Street."

On a cold dreary morning this February, about a dozen residents climbed into a
police van and went to the state hospital on Wards Island to meet with Mr.
Hogue's medical team.

'Cooperative' Inside, Furious on Street

"The psychiatrist explained to my amazement that Larry was calm and cooperative
and so they put him on the street," said Joyce Wouthers, a board member at the
First Church of Christ, Scientist, whose windows Mr. Hogue had broken. "My mouth
was hanging open."

At the time, Mr. Hogue was still in jail, but in May he bailed himself out with
his veteran's benefits, went out of control and was taken back to St. Luke's,
which sent him to the V.A. hospital, which released him a couple of weeks later.

He pleaded guilty to breaking Mrs. Lehr's car window and was sent to jail. But
in mid-August, he was back on 96th Street.

On Aug. 17, Mrs. Lehr said, a police van followed him to his bank, and from
there to a crack house. He was not arrested.

On Aug. 18, Mrs. Lehr said, she saw him walking down the street with a
screwdriver in one hand, an ice pick in the other and a machete in his back
pocket.

On the afternoon of Aug. 22, the police took him to St. Luke's after he started
jumping on the hoods of moving cars. The next morning, a neighbor told Mrs. Lehr
in disbelief, "This is not 'Nightmare on Elm Street,' but Larry's back."

On Aug. 23, Andrea Kerzner-Torgovnik, a schoolteacher, went to the window. She
said Mr. Hogue was circling her red Jetta, appraisingly touching the side-view
mirrors, when he pulled out a long knife and scraped it along the side of the
car.

In earlier years, he had threatened her dog and scared her 8-year-old son, Max,
so badly that he was afraid to ride his bike on the street. This time, she
pressed charges.

"Until he does something horrible, he's not going to be taken off the streets,"
she said.

The case has ignited a debate about the adequacy of state laws to involuntarily
commit a person like Mr. Hogue. It also raised questions about why the Veterans
Administration gave Mr. Hogue a sizable pension, apparently with no strings.

Given Mr. Hogue's violent history, the state's Commissioner of Mental Health,
Richard C. Surles, now says Mr. Hogue is likely to be committed to long-term
care. A hearing is scheduled for Sept. 21 in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.

The city's Mental Health Commissioner, Luis R. Marcos, says he believes state
law should be changed to allow involuntary hospitalization for drug addiction,
as well as mental illness.

But Gregory A. Miller, a psychiatrist who treated Mr. Hogue periodically at St.
Luke's between 1990 and this summer, is skeptical that changing the law would
make any difference. The system is so overburdened, he said, that even mentally
ill addicts who beg for help often do not get it, much less those who resist
treatment.

"What this boils down to," he said, "is that we as a society have decided to
ignore the problem and then get mad when someone is out on the street.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Gregory A. Miller, right, who has treated Larry Hogue, the
homeless man who has plagued an Upper West Side neighborhood, is skeptical that
changes in state law would solve such problems. (Associated Press; Stacey P.
Morgan for The New York Times) (pg. B4)

Graph: "The Mentally Ill: Dual Diagnosis" shows psychiatric patients discharged
from public city hospitals who had a diagnosis of mental illness and drug or
alcohol abuse, 1985-1991. (Source: New York City Health and Hospitals
Corporation) (pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Days After 'Final' Word on Draft, Clinton Faces Renewed Questions

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


A week after Bill Clinton issued what he declared was his final statement "to
set the record straight" on how he stayed out of the military during the Vietnam
War, the Democratic Presidential nominee today found himself again facing
questions about how he managed to avoid the draft.

The Los Angeles Times reported today that the Democratic candidate's late uncle,
Raymond Clinton, had led a successful lobbying effort to provide special
protection for the young Mr. Clinton from being inducted during a 10-month
period in 1968 when he was classified as 1-A, prime draft material.

The newspaper also reported that his uncle used his political connections to
have an additional slot created in a Naval Reserve unit, should his nephew
decide he wanted to spend two years as a naval reservist rather than two years
as an Army draftee.

Mr. Clinton avoided questions from reporters at campaign stops in Maryland and
Washington as his campaign strategists sought to discredit the report, saying
Mr. Clinton was unaware of any such actions by his uncle.

'It's All News to Me'

As he campaigned today in Maryland, Mr. Clinton confined himself to variations
on the theme of no comment. Several times, however, he suggested that he had no
knowledge of any lobbying efforts on his behalf, saying "It's all news to me,"
and "This is the first I ever heard of any of this."

Paul Begala, a Clinton campaign strategist, said Mr. Clinton was determined not
to discuss the issue any more. "The Governor has said all he is going to say
about this issue," Mr. Begala said. "He played by the rules, he got a high draft
lottery number and it was never called, and he explained all this at the
American Legion last week and got a very warm reception."

Central to the newspaper account, which was based on quoted statements by named
individuals, was the assertion that the lobbying campaign by Raymond Clinton, a
politically prominent automobile dealer in Hot Springs, Ark., resulted in the
creation of a Navy reserve slot specifically for Bill Clinton at a time in 1968
when such positions were no longer normally available for other young men in the
area.

The article said Mr. Clinton had not taken the slot, but that the maneuvering
had delayed induction for Mr. Clinton for more than five times the normal amount
in the area, and had allowed him to attend Oxford University as a Rhodes scholar
in the fall of 1968.

Mr. Begala said Mr. Clinton had not been a party to any of that. "If this did
exist, he didn't know about it, and he was never told about it in later years,"
he said. "This thing about the Navy he had never heard of. He did not turn down
a Navy billet."

Bush Campaign on Offensive

Bush campaign aides seized immediately on the latest development. "Every time
Bill Clinton says something is his last statement on this issue, something else
comes up and he has to change his story," said Torie Clarke, a spokeswoman for
the Bush campaign.

The events described in this account took place in 1968, the year Mr. Clinton
first entered Oxford. Earlier news accounts about Mr. Clinton's draft status
have focused on a later period, in 1969, when Mr. Clinton went back to Oxford to
start his second year of study. These previous articles told of Mr. Clinton's
successful efforts to secure a position for himself in a University of Arkansas
Reserve Officers Training Corps after receiving an induction notice while at
Oxford in the fall of 1969. Mr. Clinton secured an exemption from that induction
by promising to join the R.O.T.C.

Later, after President Richard M. Nixon announced that he would institute a
lottery for the draft, he wrote the R.O.T.C. director in Arkansas that he would
not enroll in the program. In late 1969, Mr. Clinton received a a high number in
the lottery and was never drafted.

Following the plans for his campaign today, Mr. Clinton appeared before hundreds
of students at Montgomery College, in Rockville, Md., to press his campaign's
emerging class-struggle theme, arguing Mr. Bush's Administration serves the rich
and punishes the middle class and working poor.

Advancing a theme he had begun the previous day, Mr. Clinton said Mr. Bush's
promised across-the-board tax cut was "weighted toward the wealthy," and would
necessitate harsh cuts in government programs that benefited the middle class
and students.

Using figures from the Bush Administration's mid-session budget review, Mr.
Clinton said the Administration planned cuts in financing for higher education
programs that would total more than $4 billion.

In response, the Bush campaign issued a statement by Education Secretary Lamar
Alexander that accused Mr. Clinton of playing "fast and loose with the facts."
Mr. Alexander said Mr. Clinton, as President, would fail in efforts to improve
schools because of "teacher union leaders and the Democrats in Congress draped
around his neck."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton was swamped by photographers and reporters
yesterday after addressing students at Montgomery College in Rockville, Md. As
Mr. Clinton walked behind the stage, he was surrounded by journalists clamoring
for photographs and answers to their questions. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 3, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Seek Peace Without Khmer Rouge, Sihanouk Says

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 398 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 2


Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia said today that the United Nations peace
plan for his shattered nation should go forward with or without the Khmer Rouge,
who have refused to disarm their forces in the countryside.

The Prince, who was restored as Cambodia's head of state last year and is
attending the summit meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement this week, said that
because of Khmer Rouge intransigence, "I think that the only solution is to set
aside the Khmer Rouge and to attack the problems of rehabilitation, construction
and elections in the rest of the country."

The peace plan, brokered by the United Nations to end Cambodia's 12-year-old
civil war, was placed in jeopardy when the Khmer Rouge announced in June that
they would not join in a general disarmament without new concessions from the
Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government and the United Nations.

The Khmer Rouge, a Maoist-inspired rebel group, controlled the central
Government from 1975 to 1979 and were responsible for the deaths of at least
several hundred thousand and possibly more than one million Cambodians from
execution, starvation and disease.

Talking with reporters in the Jakarta convention hall where leaders of the
108-nation Non-Aligned Movement have been meeting, the Prince said the peace
plan, including internationally supervised elections, could go forward without
the Khmer Rouge since the current Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government and
other rebel groups control most of the population.

"We have 85 percent of the Cambodian territory in population," he said. "We can
go forward."

Thousands of United Nations peacekeeping troops have fanned out across the
Cambodian countryside in recent months under terms of the peace accord. They
continue to be denied access to Khmer Rouge areas.

The Khmer Rouge have made a number of demands that, they say, must be met before
their soldiers will begin to disarm. The most recent demand would require a
redrawing of Cambodia's borders with Vietnam. It was the Vietnamese Army that
overthrew the Khmer Rouge Government in 1979.

Despite Prince Sihanouk's threat today to go forward with the peace accord
without the Khmer Rouge, it apparently had not dampened the sense of cordiality
between the Prince and Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmer Rouge.
When Khieu Samphan met the Prince here, the two embraced warmly.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Secret Night Life of Wall St.;
After Hours, a Surprising Mix of Work, Noise and Solitude

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words


From the portals of Trinity Church on lower Broadway, you can look down the
grand alley of Wall Street and see across the East River to the rooftops in
Brooklyn. That's the high sightline, a lovely slice of New York.

But at 5 P.M. no one is looking down Wall Street because everyone is walking up,
thousands of people and briefcases, two sidewalks' worth, a purposeful, slightly
bedraggled mass of bankers and brokers and lawyers sending as single-minded a
message as New Yorkers ever send: Let's get out of here. Let's go home.

And in an hour, more or less, all of them are gone, from Wall Street, from the
World Trade Center, from Financial Square, leaving behind them the manmade
caverns that, according to popular belief, echo with emptiness till dawn.

That was a myth belied this week by the burst water main at South and Broad
Streets, which at 1:30 on Tuesday morning forced the evacuation of two
buildings, 55 Water and 125 Broad, where -- surprise! -- hundreds of people
happened to be at work.

People Even Live There

The Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics keeps no figures on the number of people
who work at night in the financial district, but in addition to the white
collars working overtime, they include data entry clerks for the financial
firms, legal assistants, building maintenance and security people. There is a
handful of bartenders and deli workers and a phalanx of limo drivers. And
according to the 1990 census, there are 2,215 people actually living there, in
the triangle south of Fulton and Vesey Streets, but not including the
development at Battery Park City.

Whatever the exact dimensions of the population, a sundown-to-sunup ramble
through the area two nights after the water-main break turned up a whole
idiosyncratic pocket of street culture. It's very uncitylike, where all the
traffic is limousines and garbage trucks (even in deepest night, it's never
quiet), where you encounter people one at a time and everyone says hello and
will more than likely stop to chat if you ask them to. To judge from a night of
such conversations, they tend to be loquacious and amiable and a little
melancholy, and, like people in a small town, they seem to share a secret
they're proud of.

"It's nice to come out here at 3 A.M.," said Tad Davis, a 27-year-old legal
proofreader who was strolling the vast Austin J. Tobin Plaza in the middle of
his shift, a lone speck at the base of the twin World Trade towers. "There's a
sense of owning the World Trade Center."

A portly, bespectacled man with a long ponytail, Mr. Davis arrived in New York
seven years ago from Austin, Tex., he said, with aspirations to be an opera
singer.

"But somewhere along the line the reality of making a living hits you," he said,
"and you end up doing something ridiculous like this."

Working Without Windows

He works three nights a week from 7 P.M. to 7 A.M., on the 57th floor of One
World Trade Center, but in a room without windows. That's why he was taking his
break outside. Solitude in such a spectacular setting, he agreed, is a rare and
valuable thing.

"By the time we leave in the morning, we're like salmon swimming upstream," he
said.

Mr. Davis said things had grown steadily grimmer in the last few years; the
decline of prosperity on Wall Street has meant cutbacks in his co-workers, fewer
perks. And that was a refrain repeated all night long.

At 1 A.M. yesterday in front of the Broad Gourmet Deli on the corner of Beaver
and Broad, a fleet of white limousines -- maybe a dozen -- idled empty and their
drivers sat on the street playing cards. They were waiting around for the
lawyers or brokers, dozens of stories above them, who would need rides home to
Nassau County or New Jersey. But with the mergers and acquisitions market dried
up -- the drivers use the jargon -- there aren't as many late-night deals as
there once were.

It wasn't all gloom and doom. Before the lights were doused at midnight on the
statue of George Washington at 26 Wall (it's where Washington took his
Presidential oath in 1789, and where Jon Bon Jovi filmed a rock video at dusk),
four young people who described themselves as tourists from Bayside, Queens,
pulled up in their car and took pictures of themselves dancing around the
statue.

"We heard Bon Jovi was here," said Joel Goldenburg, getting back behind the
wheel. "He owes me money."

One of his companions, Pamela Soskin, added: "This is our mission, to harass New
York." And they sped off to locations unknown.

"Tourists," said a security guard coming off duty nearby who would give his name
only as Ken. The building he works in, 40 Wall, is 71 stories tall and has a
prominent spire. "Three times a day people come in thinking it's the Empire
State Building."

A few blocks away in front of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Frank Sherry was
just beginning his nightly exercise routine, which features acrobatic stretches
and sit-ups on the memorial plaza, among other things. Mr. Sherry, who runs a
courier company and works 10 P.M. to 5 A.M., takes an hour and a half every
night to work out.

"I've kind of made my own gymnasium out of the neighborhood," he said. "I do my
sit-ups here, wherever there's construction I can find a bar to do pull-ups. And
I run steps over at the seaport."

Mr. Sherry, 40 years old, lives in Montclair, N.J., but he thinks of this
neighborhood as a second home and of himself, apparently, as kind of a small
town police chief. "I should tell you about my relentless pursuit of people who
urinate in doorways," he said, before jogging into the darkness. "That's my pet
peeve."

And one man, Richard Condello, who lives at 3 Hanover Square, was just heading
off to a party on the Upper East Side at 2 A.M. He said he relished living in
the neighborhood mainly because of its quietude and privacy, but he obviously
hadn't met Mr. Sherry. "I could have sex right now, right over there on that
bench, and nobody would care," he said. "They might look, but they wouldn't
care."

As the night waned, back at 40 Wall, Tony Cestare put it all in some kind of
order. Mr. Cestare, for three and a half years the security man from midnight to
8 A.M., has committed the nocturnal flow of events to memory. Surveying the
empty street sometime after 3 A.M., he said, without irony, "Wall Street is
becoming a ghost town, really." And when a garbage truck stopped to pick up the
trash in front of the building, he recalled better days, before 40 Wall lost
half its tenants.

"They used to have two trucks stop here," he said.

Mr. Cestare is a former transit policeman with the haircut and compact swagger
that recall the actor James Caan -- "Yeah, I've heard that before," he said. He
said he prefers night work, "because I'm not into people too much, to tell you
the truth."

To all appearances, however, this isn't true. It was he who explained that the
flurry of activity between midnight and 12:30 was the cleaning crews getting off
work. And it was he who explained the chain of events that takes place nightly
beginning at 4 A.M., and signaling the dawn.

It happened just as he said. First the vans arrive, a battalion of them, each
towing a coffee cart which is dropped off on a sidewalk. Then the trucks begin
-- the milk trucks, the bread trucks, the newspaper trucks. Then the daytime
maintenance workers begin to trickle in off the subway.

"The first briefcases," Mr. Cestare said, "show up about 5:30."

Indeed, at 5:35, a gray-haired woman carrying a briefcase, wearing a blazer and
a skirt and walking sneakers, got off the subway at Nassau and Wall and headed
down the block. It was still pitch dark.

Headed in the door at 60 Wall, the J. P. Morgan building, she wouldn't give her
name, nor comment on what it was like to work on Wall Street at night.

"Thank God I don't work at night," she said. "I work during the day."

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At 5:00 A.M., one of the first signs of the coming business day
on Wall Street was a coffee vendor's cart being set up in front of the steps of
Federal Hall, which is diagonally across the street from the New York Stock
Exchange; "I've kind of made my own gymnasium out of the neighborhood," Frank
Sherry said, stretching at 2 A.M. by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; At 1:30
A.M., Andreas Vasiliou, a limousine driver, bounced a rubber ball in the street
as he waited for a fare. The recession has meant fewer power-brokers working
into the early morning hours before going home. (Photographs by Suzanne
DeChillo/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton Predicts Bush Will Trim Social Security

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: HOMESTEAD, Fla., Sept. 3


Pushing his new class-oriented attack that President Bush secretly plans to
"devastate America's middle class and its workers" to pay for tax cuts favoring
the rich, Bill Clinton today accused the President of pursuing economic policies
that would force him to gut Social Security.

The accusation was not based on any known plans by the Bush Administration but
rather on an edifice of inductive and political reasoning: a series of
mathematical assumptions worked out by the Democratic Presidential nominee's
advisers, based in turn on Mr. Bush's promise to cut taxes while also achieving
a savings in Federal spending.

Clinton Tours Dade County

"Two weeks ago at the Republican convention Mr. Bush addressed an anxious people
who looked for real answers to our economic problems," Mr. Clinton told leaders
of an A.F.L.-C.I.O. meeting in Washington. "But instead of a credible plan, he
gave us more incredible promises. In the face of a $400 billion deficit this
year he made a promise of another tax cut for the wealthy, then promised
everybody else an across-the-board tax cut. He said 'We're going to pay for it
with spending cuts and I'll tell you about it later.' "

After spending the morning deep into the politics of attack, Mr. Clinton spent
the afternoon and evening on the politics of compassion, touring this city and
other areas devastated by last week's hurricane in Dade County. Mr. Clinton was
punctilious in his care to avoid criticizing President Bush for his response to
Hurricane Andrew, while matching Mr. Bush in promising help for the people and
places hurt by the storm.

"I did not come here for any political purpose," Mr. Clinton told reporters in
Miami. "I do not believe there is a partisan element to this disaster." He
barely hinted at criticism, saying at one point, "There may be things we could
do, there may be ways we could be better prepared for the next one."

Asked if he would match Mr. Bush in the President's pledge that the Federal
Government would finance 100 percent -- as opposed to 75 percent, the normal
amount the Government provides -- of the recovery effort for the public
infrastructure in South Florida, Mr. Clinton said, "Given the scope of the
disaster and the total destruction of the infrastructure, I think it would be
appropriate to fulfill the 100 percent requirement." The Federal Government's
liability, at 100 percent financing, is estimated at $5 billion to $15 billion.

Likewise, Mr. Clinton strongly suggested that as President, he would repair and
reopen the nearly destroyed Homestead Air Force Base, which would cost $500
million to $1 billion. Some military analysts and Congressional Democrats have
criticized the President for promising to do this, arguing that the base serves
no useful military purpose.

'He'll be Forced to Cut'

In Washington earlier in the day, Mr. Clinton said Mr. Bush's universal tax cut,
combined with other Administration proposals like a capital-gains tax cut and
allowing parents tax credits for private school tuition, would cost the Federal
Government $1 trillion over five years.

To offset this, Mr. Clinton said, Mr. Bush would eliminate farm price supports,
tax Medicare benefits, freeze discretionary Federal spending and freeze
cost-of-living increases in spending.

"But even if he gets rid of all of it, he'll still need another $324 billion to
cut," Mr. Clinton said. He concluded with the triumph of a man who has, at last,
pulled a rabbit from the hat: "And then, he'll have no choice. He'll be forced
to cut -- even to gut -- Medicare and Social Security."

Judy Smith, a White House spokeswoman, called Mr. Clinton's accusations
"absolutely false -- another example of double speak."

"The President said in his address that he's not going to cut Medicaid and
Medicare," she said. "He said he was not going to touch Social Security."

In his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention, Mr. Bush called
only for ceilings on the growth of such benefits.

Mr. Clinton wove his Social Security charge into a speech before the cheering
and hooting labor leaders in an elaborate bid to turn Mr. Bush's favorite
question -- "Can Bill Clinton be trusted?" -- against him.

"Mr. Bush says the election should be about trust, and I believe that's right,"
Mr. Clinton said, beginning the assault. "But for George Bush to say the
election should be about trust is like me saying it should be about short
speeches."

Mr. Clinton's appearance before the leaders of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. was a
conspicuous, if expected, success for a candidate who was never a favorite of
labor groups. Recognizing obvious realities, the delegates offered Mr. Clinton
an overwhelming and perfunctory endorsement, cheered Mr. Clinton's applause
lines, and did not make impolite noises when he walked the careful line he has
made for himself on a subject hardly popular in labor quarters, free trade.

"I want a policy that expands trade in terms fair to the United States," Mr.
Clinton said, in explaining his neither-for-nor-against position on the North
American Free Trade Act recently negotiated by the Bush Administration. "I hope
we can sign the right kind of agreement with Mexico." But he was, he said, just
not sure if Mr. Bush's agreement was the right one; keeping to his theme, he
sought to turn the question of his ambivalence into a referendum on Mr. Bush's.

"The President has accused me of waffling because I wouldn't support an
agreement I hadn't read," he said. "Well, he taught me four years ago I can't
read his lips. I'm going to have to read the paper."

Mr. Clinton has been flirting with the issue of "trust" for weeks, but today's
speech, in which he incorporated his accusation that Mr. Bush is the plutocrat's
President into a larger theme that he is inherently untrustworthy, was his most
forceful and coherent exposition of the idea.

The theme of trust seems designed to function both offensively and defensively.
Offensively, it addresses the greatest vulnerability of an opponent unforgiven
by some voters for breaking his explicit 1988 promise to not raise taxes.
Defensively, it addresses, if only in implicit terms, Mr. Clinton's worst
problem, the suspicion -- much encouraged by Republicans -- that he is too slick
for his own, and the nation's, good.

It is notable that the unveiling of this theme followed immediately one of Mr.
Clinton's worst days on the trust front in some time, with the broadcasting of
news reports on Wednesday that focused fresh attention on the Democrat's
extensive efforts to avoid the draft in the Vietnam War, and on the incomplete
explanations he offered of his behavior concerning the draft earlier in the
campaign.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton talked with hurricane relief volunteers
yesterday in Florida City, Fla. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); Gov. Bill Clinton
addressing a board meeting of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. yesterday in Washington after
receiving the organization's endorsement. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Al Gore;
Gore Lashes Out at Bush On His Iran-Contra Role

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH, Sept. 3


In his sharpest and most personal attack on President Bush since being selected
as the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, Senator Al Gore today questioned
the President's explanation of his role in the Iran-contra affair, stopping just
short of calling him a liar.

In remarks inserted into his basic campaign speech, Mr. Gore repeatedly referred
to the President's "credibility canyon" in his handling of the economy and
foreign affairs. More significantly, Mr. Gore, for the first time, used the
phrase to belittle Mr. Bush's oft-repeated explanation about his part in the
Iran-contra affair.

Mr. Bush has long asserted that when he was Vice President, he was unaware of
the details of efforts undertaken under President Ronald Reagan to secure the
release of American hostages in Lebanon by selling arms to Iran and the use of
the profits from those sales to finance anti-Communist guerrillas in Nicaragua.

To underscore the personal nature of Mr. Gore's broadside against the President,
the Democrat failed to utter his customary line in which he says he does not
believe Mr. Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle are "bad people" but are merely
following erroneous policies.

Doubts by 2 Reagan Aides

Mr. Gore suggested that the central piece of evidence to question the
President's credibility was a recent report that two top Reagan aides who
opposed the arms-for-hostages deal did not believe Mr. Bush's statements that he
had been kept in the dark about the policy.

"George Bush is still saying he didn't know anything about one of the most
controversial policies of the Reagan Administration," Senator Gore said in a
speech to the 26th constitutional convention of the United Steelworkers of
America here. "Now we have some reasons to wonder about the story George Bush
has told."

In addition, the Tennessee Senator criticized Mr. Bush for the decision by
Attorney General William P. Barr not to appoint a special prosecutor to
investigate charges that Administration officials hampered efforts to prosecute
people who helped the Iraqi Government illegally use American agricultural
credits to purchase arms.

"The similarities between the two crises are overwhelming," Mr. Gore said after
his speech, referring to the Iran-contra affair and the illegal methods that
were used to allow Iraq to purchase weapons. "If he refuses to answers questions
about the first and refuses to comply with the law and establish a special
prosecutor in the second, then it raises extremely serious questions of
credibility."

Mr. Gore is raising questions about Mr. Bush's veracity, and, in effect, his
character, at a time when new questions have been raised about the explanations
by Gov. Bill Clinton, the Democratic Presidential nominee, of how he was able to
avoid being drafted during the Vietnam War. Mr. Gore told reporters that his
remarks were not an attempt to deflect the character issue away from Mr.
Clinton.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Al Gore addressing the United Steelworkers convention
yesterday in Pittsburgh. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail;
DEBATING DEBATES AND THE DRAFT

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 96 words


Bill Clinton said yesterday that President Bush should "fess up" and explain why
he refused to take part in three debates proposed by a nonpartisan group, and
Republicans responded that Mr. Clinton was trying to divert attention from his
Vietnam draft troubles.

The Clinton-Gore campaign accepted the invitation but the Bush camp has rejected
the proposal. A Republican spokeswoman, Torie Clarke, said complaints about
debates were part of a "wild streak of diversionary tactics" by the Democrats in
response to Mr. Clinton's tax proposals and the latest draft story.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS, by Elizabeth Spencer. (Penguin, $10.) This novel takes
place during the Vietnam War, but its conflicts are personal as well as
political. Mary, a former dance student, is torn between the cold rationalism of
her scientist mother and the romantic idealism of her husband, an activist and
fugitive. Last year our reviewer, Edward Hower, found the book more "about
relationships than about historical events, and this is one of its greatest
strengths."

DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster, $12.) There
is street crime and there is Wall Street crime, and as different as the latter
is from the former, James B. Stewart shows that it has no less power to threaten
society. This book, which examines the insider-trading scandals of the 1980's,
reveals how brokerage-house bad guys manipulated not only money but fundamental
free-market principles in their quest -- staggering in its scope -- for
ever-increasing wealth. " 'Den of Thieves' should, must be read by every
American who gives a damn about this country," Michael M. Thomas said in The
Book Review last year, calling it "as good a book on Wall Street as I have ever
read."

WILL YOU PLEASE BE QUIET, PLEASE? by Raymond Carver. (Vintage Contemporaries,
$10.) This edition brings back into print Raymond Carver's first short-story
collection, consisting of 22 of his spare, desperate odes to working-class life.
"They have been carefully shaped, shorn of ornamentation and directed away from
anything that might mislead," our reviewer, Geoffrey Wolff, said in 1976. Also
new in paperback is . . . WHEN WE TALK ABOUT RAYMOND CARVER, edited by Sam
Halpert (Peregrine Smith/Gibbs Smith, $11.95), a series of interviews with the
late author's intimates, including his first wife, Maryann, Richard Ford and Jay
McInerney.

BROTHERLY LOVE, by Pete Dexter. (Penguin, $10.) In a poor neighborhood in South
Philadelphia, a tragedy unfolds that our reviewer, Robert Stone, found nearly
Jacobean. Peter Flood, a man indirectly responsible for the childhood death of
his sister, grows up to assume the mantle of violence that grief and guilt have
cast upon him. "Few writers are better at describing the ways in which bad men
do evil things and forgive themselves, while good men do nothing and suffer
agonies of remorse," Mr. Stone said last year.

THE STARCHED BLUE SKY OF SPAIN: And Other Memoirs, by Josephine Herbst. (Harper
Perennial, $10.) Josephine Herbst (1892-1969), an author and radical, had her
roots in Sioux City, Iowa, but her travels and her imagination ranged all over
the world. Last year our reviewer, Alfred Kazin, described this book as her
best, a "startling personal document."

STRANGE FRUIT, by Lillian Smith. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $10.95.)
This 1944 novel, a best seller that was banned in some cities, focuses on a love
affair between a black woman and a white man in 1920's Georgia. "The tragedy of
the South is explicit in every line," said our reviewer, William Du Bois.

CHAIN REACTION: The Impact of Race, Rights, and Taxes on American Politics, by
Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. (Norton, $10.95.) The Edsalls
scrutinize America's political parties and find them both guilty: the
Republicans of exploiting white middle- and working-class racial and economic
fears, the Democrats of letting an activist agenda take them too far from their
constituents' concerns. In The Book Review last year, David Oshinsky said that
"Chain Reaction," now with a new afterword, "should be read by anyone with an
interest in American politics, but it should be required reading for Democratic
leaders who dream of someday winning another national election."

CITY OF THE MIND, by Penelope Lively. (Harper Perennial, $10.) Cities are the
sum total not only of concrete and brick, but of the memories and impressions
they leave with their citizens. Last year our reviewer, Gary Krist, compared
this novel about a London architect and the crumbling edifice of his marriage to
a "Proustian Baedeker, an effortless blending of geography and free
association."

ALVA MYRDAL: A Daughter's Memoir, by Sissela Bok. (Merloyd Lawrence/Addison
Wesley, $12.95.) Alva Myrdal (1902-86) was a wife, mother and a Nobel Peace
Prize winner in an era in which it was difficult for a woman to combine family
and work, much less high achievement. "Accurate, compassionate and honorable,
the book itself is a record of spiritual courage," Ursula K. Le Guin said here
last year.

A SCANDAL IN BELGRAVIA, by Robert Barnard. (Dell, $4.99.) Peter Proctor, as
proper as his name sounds, uses his retirement from the British Government to
unravel the decades-old murder of a colleague. Last year our reviewer, Marilyn
Stasio, said, "Mr. Barnard never loses control of his polished form, even as he
does his pretty hatchet job on the last half-century of Conservative Party
politics in England."

REMEMBERING HEAVEN'S FACE: A Moral Witness in Vietnam, by John Balaban.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $11.) Mr. Balaban, a conscientious objector,
recalls his own tour in Vietnam as a member of International Voluntary Services,
a group he joined as an alternative to military duty. Not surprisingly, he found
the experience as scarring as that of his battlefield peers. Last year our
reviewer, Doug Anderson, called this an "important book" and "a deeply moving
memoir."

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James B. Stewart (Sigrid Estrada/Simon & Shuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Two Not-Too-Remote Lodges

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT;  FLORENCE FABRICANT writes the Food Notes column
for The Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2116 words


REMOTENESS is to Alaska what hospitality is to the Deep South. But, in Alaskan
terms, the Tutka Bay Lodge on Kachemak Bay is not particularly out of the way. A
flight of less than an hour from Anchorage to Homer, a taxi ride out to the
mile-long natural spit that houses the Homer docks and then a 25-minute trip
across the bay by motorboat and you're there.

Or nearly there. It was a brilliantly clear afternoon so on the spur of the
moment Jon Osgood, who owns the lodge with his wife, Nelda, and was at the helm
of the boat, suggested we take advantage of the weather and helicopter to the
Harding Glacier. This was an expedition that the four of us -- my husband and I
and another couple -- had originally planned for the following day. After a
couple of calls by radiophone, the boat wheeled 180 degrees and there we were,
back at the Homer Airport.

As Mr. Osgood, who was a helicopter pilot in Vietnam, took the controls, we
donned headphones, and the small white craft lifted off over the bay, soaring
toward the glacier-covered mountains. On the way we hovered long enough to view
black bears, mountain goats and moose in the hilly tree-studded terrain split by
waterfalls.

We landed on the glacier. Beneath our feet was the craggy, porous ice of what
had been a distant frosting on the mountains. The shimmering blue of the deep
crevices contrasted with the dirty gray near the edges of the glacier where the
slowly moving mass scoured the rocks, turning them to gravelly rubble.

We toasted our "conquest" of the glacier and our arrival in Alaska with a bottle
of champagne that Mr. Osgood had tucked in a cooler in the helicopter. The
return flight included a heartstopping run through a canyon. Soon we were back
on the boat heading for the lodge. On the way, platoons of dark shearwaters
wheeled in formation inches from the water, part of a welcoming committee that
also included cormorants, murres and gulls.

Tutka Bay Lodge sits perched on a promontory overlooking a tidal inlet of
Kachemak Bay, an arm of the Cook Inlet. The main lodge, actually the Osgood's
house, which began 15 years ago as their fishing retreat, now has a spacious
dining area. The cabins, varying in size from a room for two to a duplex with
kitchen and private bath, provide rustic comfort. The construction is simple,
with cedar siding and windows big enough to catch the view.

All the buildings are connected by a series of platforms and decks surrounded by
a lush bit of Northern rain forest dense with mighty conifers dripping green
moss. The spongy moss thickly covers the undulating trails that wind around the
spit of land, so it's like walking across a bed. A glorious, typically late
sunset rewards the hiker willing to follow this buoyant route for about a mile
after dinner.

We spent five days at Tutka Bay Lodge, hiking into the hills, motoring out in
Mr. Osgood's boat to view the puffins, eagles and cormorants that make Gull
Island home, exploring some nearby villages originally settled by the Russians,
fishing and kayaking. Rick Harness, a summer neighbor whose boat, fishing tackle
and fleet of sea kayaks are for hire, became our guide on two occasions.

One afternoon our mini-fleet of three lightweight sea kayaks navigated the bay
among rollicking sea otters and seals. Another day we tried casting for salmon
and trawling for halibut, efforts that failed utterly to diminish the fish
population. The silver salmon were jumping, but not onto our hooks. It became an
opportunity to view owls and more bald eagles, to see dolphins, watch sea otters
cracking Dungeness crabs as they skimmed along the water, and listen to Mr.
Harness recite the ribald poems about the Alaskan frontier by Robert W. Service.

On these outings we were fortified with delicious picnic lunches, thick
sandwiches of fresh salmon on wholegrain bread, salads and big peanut butter
cookies packed for us at the lodge. The kitchen, run by Nelda Osgood, a
naturalist who also conducts walks around the property, and staffed by Bob and
Rosella Scott, a couple from Kodiak Island, provided the hearty breakfasts of
oatmeal, pancakes with blueberry syrup and eggs with sausage.

Home-style dinners focused on seafood like salmon, halibut, scallops and crab
finished with home-baked desserts accompanied by wine and beer. From the dining
room, a windowed aerie overlooking a tidal inlet, an eagle could be seen in
residence. One evening, as we sat with the Osgoods and two other guests at the
14-foot oak table, the conversation-stopper was a black bear lumbering casually
out of the woods.

Dinner was also a time to learn about Alaska, its people, politics and problems,
and what it's like to live there. Mrs. Osgood would explain the profusion of
marine life at the shore, from the delicate sea anemones fluttering just under
water to the long thick ropes of bullwhip kelp that litter the rocky strand.

Our accommodations were in the two-story hillside cabin called Eagle's Nest,
with decks, soaring windows, a fireplace, sleeping loft, kitchenette and
bathroom. The three other smaller cabins lining the deck, one of which also has
a fireplace, share a separate bathhouse. There is also a sauna, but no phones or
faxes. Contact with the outside world is by radio.

You set your own pace at Tutka Bay Lodge and your hosts adapt to the needs of as
many as 15 guests at a time, some of whom may be on the go on foot taking
daylong hikes or in boats fishing or kayaking from the crack of dawn, others
preferring to spend time watching the birds and sea creatures that come into
view at the dock. Plans are often made at the breakfast table, according to whim
and weather.

FROM the marine setting of Tutka Bay Lodge we traveled to a different landscape
deep in Denali National Park, a majestic wilderness reserve encompassing more
than 5.6 million acres. There are several large hotels and lodges near the park
entrance, most of which cater to tourists on quick one- or two-day interludes
from cruises. Our destination, about 90 miles into the park from the entrance,
was North Face Lodge.

With its more rustic companion, Camp Denali, it is the only accommodation on
park territory with a view of Denali, formerly Mount McKinley, the tallest
mountain in North America. That is, when the mountain emerges from the thick
clouds that often enshroud it. The guest book at the lodge has room for name,
address and "did you see the mountain?"

The five-hour trip on the lodge's school bus along the park road that winds
through the mountains was on an overcast day. It was punctuated by frequent
stops to view caribou, moose, foxes, Dall sheep, eagles, hawks, Arctic squirrels
and beavers, some close enough to make binoculars unnecessary, but no view of
the mountain. No grizzlies either, for that matter.

The National Park Service runs regular shuttle buses along the road, most of
which penetrate about 65 miles into the park to the Eielson Visitors Center. A
few go as far as Wonder Lake, about 20 miles beyond, a favorite of many
photographers, including Ansel Adams. But North Face Lodge is the only public
accommodation permitted to run its own buses on routes within the park.

We finally reached the lodge, an L-shaped single-story structure set
unobtrusively on a hillside, in time for dinner. The main lodge is a large,
wood-paneled building with a massive stone fireplace and comfortably worn
leather furniture. Attached to it are motel-like accommodations for up to 40
guests in small but cozy down-quilted rooms with private bath. The simpler
lodgepole cabins of Camp Denali command the hill above North Face.

The next day, from a lunch stop on an outcrop during a hike we saw the clouds
move off and Denali, the majestic snow-capped 20,320-foot mountain dominating
the Alaska Range, appeared. And it remained within view throughout the rest of
our five-day stay, from the rosy light of early morning to the stunning,
salmon-pink glow in sunset and the surreal glimmer in the moonlight. Watching
the mountain became a compelling part of the day's activities.

A telescope stationed at the picture windows in the living room area of the
comfortable lodge remains trained in the direction of the mountain. Guests often
interrupt breakfast or dinner to take another look. Airplane excursions around
the mountain with Lowell Thomas Jr., one of the best-known of Alaska's many bush
pilots, are also available, for an even closer view of Denali.

If we studied the mountain, we also examined the wildflowers, berries and other
flora that carpeted our hiking routes in the tundra with a blaze of color. There
are countless marked and unmarked trails and paths leading up, down and around
hills and through the valleys and the dry gravelly riverbeds of the park.
Visiting in late summer at the end of the season meant less of Alaska's
inevitable rain, cooler weather for hiking and, mercifully, no plagues of
bloodthirsty Alaskan mosquitoes. Only the abundance of edible berries --
especially blueberries and lingonberries -- and animals in binocular range
interfered with our progress on hikes.

After dinner we walked to beaver dams and sat for an hour watching these
creatures felling tree branches and dragging them across the network of swampy
ponds. Caribou would come into view over a mountain ridge as we returned to the
lodge in the glow of the late setting sun. Like walking on a glacier on Kenai
Peninsula or slowly motoring in a small boat on Kachemak Bay, a hike through the
tundra in Denali National Park to observe the flora and wait for the fauna to
break the horizon is a totally absorbing escape from the everyday.

Back at the lodge, something of a friendly boarding-school atmosphere pervades.
Arrival and departure dates are on a fixed three- or four-day schedule. On the
first morning, new arrivals stand up and give a brief biography. No alcohol is
permitted in the dining room or lounge (not even on a bring-one's-own basis) so
the genial cocktail hour consists of juice with vegetables and dip.

Highlighting the hearty breakfasts and dinners are the homemade breads and
pastries. The rest of the food with its 1960's granola overtones is edible but
hardly memorable. Box lunches are self-service affairs assembled from a buffet
of ingredients laid out after breakfast. Dinner is served by 6 P.M., annoyingly
early for those of us returning from hikes at 5:15 who would like to shower and
relax a bit.

Late one night the Northern Lights put on a display of white, gold and green
streaks across the sky. And finally, from the bus as we were returning to the
park entrance, we saw families of grizzlies roaming in the open, mothers, cubs
and huge males, the thick golden fur shimmering on their flanks. We watched them
till they lumbered off into the brush and then we went on our way.



PLANNING A STAY IN THE WILDS

Tutka Bay Lodge on Kachemak Bay, Alaska, is open all year. Accommodations range
from $400 to $550 a person for a minimum two-night package that includes all
meals, boat transportation to and from the Homer dock, hikes and nature walks.
Most accommodations have bath and toilet facilities and have use of the sauna.
Smoking is not permitted in the rooms. Sea kayaking and fishing expeditions are
extra and helicopter rides are about $225 a person, based on four passengers,
for approximately an hour and a half. Free mountain bikes are available. Contact
Jon and Nelda Osgood, Tutka Bay Lodge, Post Office Box 960, Homer, Alaska 99603.
Telephone (907) 235-3905.

Homer is about 200 miles from Anchorage and can be reached by rental car in
about five hours. A flight from Anchorage takes about 45 minutes.

North Face Lodge and Camp Denali operate from early June through early September
with fixed arrival and departure dates that begin next year on June 9. Two-night
packages are $500 plus tax a person or three-night packages for $750 plus tax
are available for North Face Lodge. Packages from $675 to $1,125 for three to
five nights are available for Camp Denali.

Prices include meals, transportation to and from Denali Park railway station at
the entrance to the park, naturalist guides and evening activities. Alcoholic
beverages are not served and are permitted only in guest rooms. Airplane
excursions are around $100 a person. For information through late May contact
Post Office Box 369, Cornish, N.H. 03746. Telephone (603) 675-2248. From late
May through early September, Post Office Box 67, Denali National Park, Alaska
99755. Telephone (907) 683-2290.

There is train and bus service to the Denali Park railway station about 240
miles from Anchorage and 135 miles from Fairbanks. Rental cars can also be
arranged.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the North Face Lodge, Denali National Park, Alaska. Tutka
Bay Lodge, Kachemak Bay, Alaska. (pf. 12)Camp Denali, Denali National Park. (pg.
18)(Photographs by Florence Fabricant)

Map of Alaska showing location of Denali National Park.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Millions of New Immigrants Yearning to Call Home

BYLINE: By JONATHAN BURTON;  Jonathan Burton writes frequently about marketing
from New York.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


WHEN Radha Krishnan arrived in New York from his native India in June 1983,
fresh out of medical school, he went straight to his parents' house in White
Plains, N.Y., and telephoned family and friends back home. Calling Dehli is
almost as easy as dialing Dallas -- one reason why Dr. Krishnan, now a physician
at the Mercer Medical Center in Trenton, N.J., still spends about $60 a month on
calls to India.

Many immigrants spend much more on an expense that is an accepted fact of
immigrant life -- and one not lost on the American Telephone & Telegraph
Company, MCI Communications Corporation and the Sprint Corporation.

The three big long-distance carriers have recently embarked on nationwide
campaigns to capitalize on the tidal wave of immigration in the 1980's and
1990's that may represent the greatest to the United States since the turn of
the century. About 8.6 million people settled legally in the United States from
abroad between 1980 and 1990 and nearly 10 million more are expected in this
decade, mostly from Asia and Mexico.

The stakes are high. International calling volume is growing at a far healthier
rate than domestic long-distance demand. Revenue from overseas calling is
expected to reach $8.6 billion by 1996, nearly double the $4.4 billion the
industry realized in 1991. Last year international telephone traffic represented
20 percent of the $23 billion in calls placed in the United States; by 1996 it
could total 27 percent of a $32 billion business.

The long-distance telephone companies have gone to great length and expense to
reach these new Americans. A recent arrival from Seoul, for example, can expect
to find promotions from A.T.&T., MCI and Sprint in the mail every few weeks. The
phone companies buy mailing lists and even tap vehicle registrations for names
of immigrant households.

The phones companies are also offering special holiday discounts. On Chusok, an
autumn festival, all calls to South Korea are automatically discounted. Rates
are lower to Mexico for Cinco de Mayo and to Ireland on St. Patrick's Day.

There are other services to lure immigrant customers. At Korean-American
community events, the telephone companies set up booths that feature free
long-distance calls and immediate sign-ups. Long-distance operators are
available to assist in almost any language, whether a customer speaks Spanish or
Vietnamese.

MCI is credited as the first long-distance carrier to plunge into this
event-oriented, grass-roots marketing, particularly within the past two years.
Although there are no market share figures, A.T.&T. has been working hard to
lure customers this way, while Sprint is active but seen as somewhat late to the
game.

As more countries can be called from the U.S., long-distance carriers are able
to target new ethnic groups. Since earlier this year, Vietnam and Cambodia can
be dialed direct from America, opening a window for an estimated 700,000
Vietnamese-Americans and 250,000 Cambodian-Americans. Direct-dial service to
Armenia was also introduced this year, sparking interest among the roughly
800,000 people of Armenian descent in the United States. Asked about inroads to
the Armenian-American community, Marguerite M. McHale, A.T.&T.'s manager of
international marketing, replied that there have been few. "You've given me an
idea," she added.

IDEAS apparently do not remain secret for long in the telephone business -- one
reason why pricing, promotions and service are often alike. A.T.&T. threw a
party at an upscale Korean restaurant in New York one recent evening for local
Korean-American community leaders and journalists. Not to be outdone, MCI
invited a similar group to a luncheon at the United Nations the next week.

While advertising in foreign-language newspapers and magazines is the key medium
used by telephone companies to reach new Americans, foreign-language television
is becoming a more popular forum for the long-distance carriers.

"They have emerged as our lead sponsors," said Rosemary Fincher Danon, executive
vice president of the Los Angeles-based International Channel Network, which
provides programming nationwide in 17 foreign languages, including Mandarin,
Cantonese, Korean, Japanese, Tagalog and Hindi.

During one recent broadcast day, International Channel viewers could see A.T.&T.
commercials in Mandarin, Korean and Tagalog, MCI spots in Japanese, Tagalog and
Hindi, and Sprint ads in Hindi, French, German and Italian. "Airlines and phone
companies are the best things that have ever happened to us," said Ms. Danon.

But the most effective advertising may be word of mouth. One in three new
arrivals from Asia relied on family and friends in choosing a carrier, according
to a 1990 survey of 1,800 Chinese, Indian, Filipino, Japanese and Korean
immigrants. For Chinese-Americans, the average was 60 percent. The study,
conducted by New York-based P.S.I. Inc. and the Institute of Asian Studies at
St. John's University in New York, was partially funded by A.T.&T.

THE survey also found that 40 percent of the Korean-Americans who responded call
friends and relatives overseas at least once a week -- far more than the other
groups polled. One reason may be that Koreans are among the newest arrivals to
this country.

Tai Cho, president of the Tai Han Broadcasting Corporation, which broadcasts
Korean-language television to the New York metropolitan area, ventures another:
Koreans phone home often because it is expected of them. "We're raised that
way," he said. "We have some guilt feelings if we don't call regularly."



REACHING OUT TO ASIANS

TO reach immigrant Americans, the long-distance carriers have steered from their
mainstream Madison Avenue advertising agencies to smaller shops that specialize
in ethnic markets. Perhaps the most vivid illustrations involve advertising to
Asian-Americans, the fastest-growing immigrant group.

A.T.&T. and MCI in particular get help from several advertising agencies owned
by Asian-Americans that have assembled in-language campaigns for nationwide
direct mail, print and television. A.T.&T. is said to have committed several
million dollars to this effort, far more than its competitors.

The 7.3 million Americans of Asian descent have little in common with each other
but geography. Korean-Americans are worlds apart from Japanese-Americans, and
even Cantonese-speakers from Hong Kong have different values than
Mandarin-speaking Taiwanese.

Some common denominators do surface, namely subtlety and tradition. A.T.&T.
tells mainstream America pointedly that "we want you back," but it politely
informs Japanese-Americans in Japanese that "we are waiting for your call."

A.T.&T.'s pitch to Asian America is the responsibility of Amko Advertising Inc.,
a small New York-based agency run by two Asian marketing veterans, Eliot Kang
and David Lee. Amko's staff includes native speakers of Mandarin, Cantonese,
Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese. MCI splits business between two New York-based
shops, Lee Liu & Tong Inc. and L3 Advertising Inc.

While people of Chinese and Korean backgrounds will often base a purchase
decision on price, Japanese-Americans tend to value corporate history. Last year
L3 created a humorous television commercial for Mandarin-speakers touting MCI's
claim that it offers savings over rival A.T.&T. In it, a young Chinese-American
woman calls her mother in Taiwan for a recipe. When she receives her A.T.&T.
bill, the young woman says she could have gone out to dinner on the extra money
she spent.

An Amko-produced spot aimed at Japanese-Americans countered that the difference
between A.T.&T. and other long-distance carriers is a matter of a few pennies.
Spend the money for A.T.&T.'s reliability, the advertisement challenged, or save
it and get lesser quality.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Some Fast-Growing Ethnic Groups" shows some fast growing Asian
and Hispanic ethnic groups. (Source: Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Country

BYLINE: By Roy Reed;  Roy Reed, a former reporter for The New York Times, is a
native of Hot Springs, Ark. A professor of journalism at the University of
Arkansas, he is working on a biography of Orval Faubus.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3972 words


Some people in the North see only redneck Bubbas when they look south. The South
has plenty of rednecks. And Southerners have cultivated the redneck image to
some extent to deceive outsiders into thinking that all of us down here are a
bunch of country boys, easily gulled. Historically, that has meant that the
outsider should keep one hand on his wallet. In my part of the South, there is
also a tendency not to care much about the world's good opinion. If New York's
style is in-your-face, Arkansas's is mind-your-own-business. To our discomfort,
we are now being asked to explain ourselves, thanks to Bill Clinton.

So, how to explain the prevalence of progressive politics in this Dogpatch of a
place? There are several causes. Alongside a lot of poverty, mismanagement,
corruption, violence and plain bad luck stretching back to the 19th century,
Arkansas has been fortunate in certain of its leaders and institutions. It had a
strong but little-known cadre of activist women in the 20's and 30's that
predated the women's movement. It was blessed, until last fall, with a statewide
newspaper of uncommon elegance and influence. The same poverty that has dogged
the state from its beginnings has spawned a hardy political ideology that has
tended continuously, if erratically, toward antiestablishment populism, giving
rise to a succession of leaders who have tried to stand up for common people.

Although Bill Clinton defined himself successfully in the Democratic primaries
as a centrist, he started his political life as a populist liberal. (Republicans
may not be surprised to hear this.) I covered his first race for public office
in 1974, an unsuccessful campaign for Congress, and was astonished to hear this
28-year-old law-school teacher addressing conservative Rotary Clubs on the
dangers of corporate abuse of power. Beware of the multinational corporations,
he warned. Clinton had received his political baptism in the 1972 Presidential
campaign of George McGovern, and was proud to call himself a a liberal. After he
entered statewide politics, Clinton toned down some of his progressive rhetoric,
but there is no evidence that he ever really abandoned his populism. Echoes of
it can be heard in his campaign speeches this year, as he proposes tax increases
for those at the top of the economic ladder.

The progressive-populist phenomenon is not hard to trace in Arkansas. The state
has had more than its share of political plunderers, and the ordinary people
have had to fight back. With a few noble exceptions, the state's founders in the
1830's were a band of thieves. They stole land, money and resources impartially
from their fellow European settlers and the resident Quapaws. Shortly after
statehood in 1836, banking and bond scandals erupted that ruined the state's
reputation for generations. The first session of the legislature, in 1837, was
distinguished by a murder; the House speaker stabbed a colleague with a bowie
knife, one of the state's first manufactured products.

Understandably, a suspicion of politicians was one of the earliest attributes of
the Arkansas mentality. John Gould Fletcher, a poet and historian of his state,
says it remained strong into the 20th century, especially in the hill people
whose manner of speaking he liked to re-create: "He warn't getting nowheres,
with most of the land worthless and the rest of it wearing out. Them politician
fellers in Little Rock, the high-stovepipe-hat, silk-stocking crowd, had never
done a danged thing for him or his kind." Echoes of that sentiment can still be
heard in the hills and small towns, and even in the cotton-socks wards of Little
Rock.

All the while, there was fermenting in the state a political spirit that
bordered on revolutionary. The populist movement that swept the South and part
of the West during the last years of the 1800's had one of its strongest
branches in rural Arkansas. Farmers here had a hard time deciding whom they
hated most -- the bandits on Wall Street or the bankers on Main Street. A
turn-of-the-century Governor named Jeff Davis ran all his political races
against Wall Street and "those high-collared roosters" in Little Rock. Davis
would eventually make it to the United States Senate, but he would never lose
his common touch. At one of his first fancy dinners in Washington, seated
between two ladies, he is said to have taken a bite of something hot and
promptly spit it onto the floor. In the hush that followed, he exclaimed to his
shocked table mates, "Some damn fools would have swallowed that."

Even populism was not strong enough for some Arkansawyers, as residents called
themselves until a few years ago, when, in a fit of image improvement, an
unsettling number became Arkansans. A few thousand took up a kind of barnyard
Marxism and voted Socialist between 1900 and World War I. In 1910, an Ozarks
farmer named Sam Faubus named his oldest child Orval Eugene after his hero, the
Socialist leader and labor reformer Eugene V. Debs. Then he organized the Greasy
Creek chapter of the Socialist Party and signed up almost every family in the
neighborhood. The boy grew up to become Arkansas's most famous Governor until
Bill Clinton came along. Most people remember Governor Faubus for an event that
is hard to square with his left-wing upbringing -- his 1957 challenge of the
Federal courts on school desegregation that forced President Eisenhower to send
Federal troops to Little Rock to put black children into Central High School.

Arkansas's progressivism was especially strong during the Depression and helped
President Roosevelt enact the New Deal. The Senate Majority Leader was Joseph T.
Robinson, a native of rural Lonoke County who had been Al Smith's Democratic
running mate in his unsuccessful Presidential campaign of 1928. It was Senator
Robinson who steered F.D.R.'s legislation through the Senate. In 1932, the year
Franklin D. Roosevelt defeated President Herbert Hoover, the voters of Arkansas
made progressive history in another way. They elected Hattie Caraway to the
United States Senate. She was the first woman elected to a full term in that
body.

During that same period, a campaign against lynching was picking up steam all
across the South. Its leaders were unlikely heroes -- high-born and well-to-do
white women. Arkansas had an outspoken group that included Adolphine Terry,
sister of the poet Fletcher and wife of a Congressman, David D. Terry. Mrs.
Terry had been educated at Vassar. She and her friends threw themselves into the
campaign vigorously, and, aided by The Arkansas Gazette, effectively put a stop
to the barbarism in Arkansas. Twenty years later, when Little Rock was thrust
into the world spotlight by the struggle to desegregate its schools, it was Mrs.
Terry and her sisters who led the fight for racial justice.

The progressive impulse continued into the late 1930's. Gov. Carl Bailey bucked
the political establishment -- dominated by wealthy Delta planters, some of whom
kept their workers in a state of near-peonage -- by advocating social welfare
for the poor, elderly and disabled. He reorganized the state welfare department
to qualify Arkansas for full participation in all Federal welfare programs. But
perhaps his main contribution was to help elect to the United States Senate a
bright young man named J. W. Fulbright, who was running against an enemy of
Bailey's, Homer M. Adkins, who had defeated Bailey for governor in 1940. Bailey
took his revenge four years later by campaigning for Fulbright against Adkins
for the Senate.

As a freshman Congressman, Fulbright had already been instrumental in passing
the resolution that led directly to the formation of the United Nations after
World War II. He went on in the Senate to become a leader in international
affairs and education, and in the 1960's he became the principal Congressional
critic of the Vietnam War.

If Bill Clinton should become President, Fulbright will be remembered for one
other accomplishment: He exposed young Clinton to national politics and became
his first political mentor.

Lee Williams, Senator Fulbright's administrative assistant, was looking for
someone to help around the office in 1967. Bill Clinton had been recommended by
an Arkansas political ally who had seen the young man at work in a state
campaign earlier. When Williams telephoned Clinton in Arkansas, he said, "You
can have a part-time job for $3,500 a year or a full-time job for $5,000." To
which Clinton replied, "How about two part-time jobs?" Williams said: "You're
just the guy I'm looking for. Be here Monday."

On the Fulbright staff, Clinton did whatever needed doing. Among other things,
he helped set up public hearings on the Vietnam War. He watched and listened as
Senator Fulbright, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, grilled the
generals and cabinet officers and aroused the nation's conscience over America's
involvement in Southeast Asia. He witnessed Fulbright's obsession with
education. When he himself became a Rhodes scholar, it was a matter of pride to
him that his hero had been one, too.

"There's no doubt that Fulbright was a major influence on Clinton," Williams
said recently. Big events were taking place, and the young man soaked them up --
all the while studying the Fulbright style and character.

Clinton was not the only Arkansas politician influenced by Senator Fulbright.
There was also David Pryor, now a Senator, who went to Washington as a House
page when he was a boy and was struck with admiration for Arkansas's
distinguished Senator. Even Dale Bumpers, the man who defeated Fulbright in
1974, was one of his admirers. Scores, perhaps hundreds, of progressive
political activists in Arkansas trace their interest in public affairs to
Fulbright and to his example.

RACE WAS THE all-determining, crippling issue in the South from the beginning of
the nation until the 1960's. But in Arkansas, out on the western edge of the
region, up against the Indian Territory, whites have generally been more
accommodating toward their black neighbors than whites are elsewhere in the Deep
South. That has been reflected, however imperfectly, in the state's politics.

Sidney S. McMath, a war hero, came home and took over the Governor's office in
1948. He was a friend of President Harry S. Truman and a liberal Democrat all
the way -- even on the race issue. One of McMath's proteges was another World
War II veteran, Orval Faubus. When Faubus began his turn as Governor in 1954, he
looked to be as liberal as his predecessor. He appointed the first black members
of the state Democratic Central Committee. He watched, and did not obstruct, the
desegregation of several school districts around the state after the 1954
Supreme Court decision decreeing an end to segregated public schools. Then his
political opponents began to attack him as an integrationist, the one label no
Southern politician could afford in the 1950's. He finally gave in to the
massive segregationist pressures and made his play against the Federal courts in
1957. That won him four more terms -- six altogether -- and an indelible stigma
in the national mind as the quintessential racial separatist.

It also tarnished what was, in many ways, an unusually progressive record:
Faubus raised taxes for education and other services; he reformed the snake pit
of a state mental hospital into a modern institution; he built the state's first
facility for retarded children; he cultivated the rich men who held
behind-the-scenes power, but he also kept friendly ties to labor. After the
anger of 1957 subsided, he built new bridges to the black community, even
bringing in some of his former black enemies as advisers. When a modern
voter-registration system replaced the poll tax in 1964, Faubus went along with
electoral reform. Voting machines and clean elections replaced the poll tax and
electoral fraud, at least in the more populous counties.

SOUTHERNERS HAVE come to expect scorn from the rest of the country. They suspect
that this scorn is tied somehow to the way they talk. To a Southerner, a New
York accent is strange, funny, exotic or, at worst, a signal of approaching
danger. To a New Yorker, a Southern accent is mush-mouth, grating, irritating
or, at worst, contemptible. Both perceptions are grounded in regional prejudice,
but one is more pernicious -- in the same way that white racism, coming from the
dominant culture, is more pernicious than black racism.  Many Southerners
believe that if Bill Clinton is defeated in November, the reason will be not his
politics or his "character," but a pervasive regional scorn that wounds all of
us down here, year in and year out.

Arkansawyers have probably been more image-conscious than most Americans, even
most Southerners, simply because their image has been so consistently poor. It
is hard to say how much of this image of redneck benightedness is earned and how
much is the result of a national need to poke fun at someone. Bob Lancaster, in
his book "The Jungles of Arkansas," devotes four pages to tracing the national
myth that Arkansawyers don't wear shoes.

Bill Clinton came of age understanding that the state's endemic pessimism was
part of its problem. "I knew the poverty of my roots," he told me some years
ago. "But my people were optimistic and demanding. I've always had a passion
about trying to get rid of this 'poor me' attitude a lot of people have about
Arkansas, or this sense of limitation, or 'What do you expect -- this is just
Arkansas, we can't do this, that or the other.' I was raised by people who
deliberately tried to disabuse me of that idea from the time I was old enough to
think."

His wife, Hillary, who was reared in a middle-class suburb of Chicago, joined
her husband in fighting the Arkansas defensiveness. Thanks to their leadership,
the tail-tucked citizens of Arkansas have lost a little of their suspicion of
the outer United States.

While mind-your-own-business is the main component of the Arkansas political
style, there is also a quality that can only be called behind-your-back.
Important decisions in the state tend to get made by important men in the quiet
of their clubs and offices. In the last two generations, none have been more
influential than the men in and around the investment house of Stephens Inc. The
state has other wealthy businessmen, like Don Tyson, whose family runs the
largest poultry business in the world. Through the thriving Wal-Mart chain, the
heirs of the late Sam Walton of Bentonville still lay claim to the nation's
largest fortune. But none have been so influential in Arkansas politics as the
brothers Jackson T. and W. R. (Witt) Stephens.

Before Witt died last year, he had been the leading king-maker in Arkansas
politics since the 1940's. Growing wealthy from investments in bonds and natural
gas, he used his money -- and that of his friends -- to shape policy in Little
Rock and Washington, and was politically friendly with all but two of the 10
Arkansas governors since World War II. One of those exceptions was Winthrop
Rockefeller, a man who did not need Stephens's money. The other was Dale
Bumpers, now a Senator, who simply did not like the Stephenses. Of the remaining
eight, Bill Clinton has probably had less to do with the Stephenses than
anybody, maintaining a kind of strained cordiality, but without much trust on
either side.

Clinton's support has always been so broad-based that he has not had to rely
heavily on any one person or special interest. That is not to say that the
Governor is unfriendly to special interests; it is just that no one group
controls him. With the death of Witt Stephens, whose influence had already
eroded, the state lost its last real power broker.

In her book "Arkansas Politics and Government," Diane D. Blair, a political
scientist at the University of Arkansas, argues that Arkansas never had a large
and powerful socioeconomic elite like the older states of the Confederacy. She
notes that although slaves were essential to the cotton economy here, as
elsewhere, Arkansas never had many big slave owners. Even after emancipation,
the large planters managed to throw their weight around, but they had to share
political power with the mule-headed hill people who always seemed to go their
own way.

Sometime during the 1950's and 1960's, after mechanized agriculture forced
blacks off the plantations and voting was regularized, the Delta planters became
just another interest group. The old rural elite was supplanted by a business
elite in the cities, triggering a demand for a more presentable class of
politicians: People like Bill Fulbright, a university president; Sid McMath, a
modern, educated man; David Pryor, a polished reformer; Winthrop Rockefeller, a
transplanted sophisticate from New York; Dale Bumpers, a successful lawyer. And
Bill Clinton -- Oxford, Yale, Georgetown -- a politician who would never spit
his food on the floor, no matter what the provocation.

These refined and reformist politicians, like their predecessors going back to
the 30's, have been elected time after time by a coalition of white and black
urban and small-town voters who have increasingly demanded clean government and
some semblance of progressive ideas. How a majority of the state's voters
developed a taste for progressive politics is hard to explain. Professor Blair
grapples with the question, suggesting several theories. One that has
credibility among many observers is the longtime influence of the liberal
Arkansas Gazette, which died last fall after 172 years of publication. "The
major difference between Arkansas and the rest of the South has been The
Arkansas Gazette," David Pryor once said.

The Gazette opposed lynching when it was unpopular to do so. It opposed the
Arkansas Power and Light Company, a major political influence of the 30's and
40's, because its longtime owner, J. N. Heiskill, thought no one interest should
exercise so much power. It opposed Governor Faubus over his school desegregation
actions in 1957 and lost 30,000 subscribers in a month. From the 50's on, The
Gazette took one liberal position after another on its editorial page. Even
people who hated the editorials read the newspaper because it was literate and
filled with information on how the state was run. Few other Southern states had
this provocative counterweight to their conservative inclinations. Those who
grieve The Gazette's passing wonder whether the surviving statewide newspaper,
The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, will be able to fill the gap.

But deeper than the influence of any one institution has been the phenomenon of
populism, born of poverty and hard times. Arkansas has always ranked at or near
the bottom in virtually all the national indexes of economic well-being. The
state now ranks 47th in per-capita income. Although there is evidence that in
the past year, Arkansas's personal-income growth has outpaced the nation's,
census figures for the 1980's show that the state's median household income
dropped from 73 percent of the national median to 70 per cent at the end of the
decade. Lagging behind the rest of the country has inspired generations of
populist resentment against big wealth and its political influence.

Alongside that resentment has been a long and unflagging antipathy to corrupt
politics and electoral fraud. One piece of recent scholarship on Arkansas
politics is "How I Stole Elections," by Marlin Hawkins, a former sheriff of
Conway County, up the Arkansas River from Little Rock. Sheriff Hawkins operated
the last truly efficient political machine in the state. In his prime, he could
deliver votes for a chosen candidate to within 100 of the exact number needed to
win. Since the political boss's retirement, he has become a folk hero, partly
because everyone understands that his style of politics was a lot more colorful
and entertaining than the punctilious form that replaced it. Nevertheless, the
voters who came of age during the decline of machine politics in the 60's seem
to prefer not only cleaner government but also more forward-looking policies.
For example, no serious candidate for office today would think of alienating the
black electorate, which represents about 16 percent of the state's 2.5 million
population. Few candidates in Arkansas fail to portray themselves as champions
of equal rights and social welfare.

A DARK CORRIDOR of the Arkansas Capitol reveals opposing bronze busts of the two
men who were, until recently, the state's most important governors. Their
sculptors have put an impish grin on Orval Faubus and a grim face on Winthrop
Rockefeller -- masks of comedy and tragedy that are almost the reverse of the
real-life personas of the two men. In a way, those two busts encapsulate the
entire contradictory history of Arkansas politics.

Faubus was probably the last political figure in America to have been born in a
log cabin. He grew up not only in a socialist household but also in what today
would be described as poverty. He knew both hard work and hardship. Rockefeller
was reared in a wealthy Republican nest in New York. His grandfather was the man
who cornered the market in kerosene, among other things, and raised the price so
high that families like the Faubuses could barely afford it. Winthrop spent his
playboy years squandering the fruits of that greed.

But after Rockefeller succeeded the retiring Faubus as Governor in 1966, he
would earn a reputation as a great reformer and modernizer of Arkansas politics.
It was Rockefeller's money that financed the difficult work of putting 105,000
black voters on the Arkansas registration lists after the abolition of the poll
tax in 1964. He forced the old machine politicians to accommodate to a new
reality in Arkansas politics. Hundreds of thousands of voters not only came to
expect clean elections but also gained a new respect for racial tolerance and
social welfare.

Since the Rockefeller era, virtually all of the state's governors, senators and
representatives have been considered progressive, sometimes even liberal.
Senators Bumpers and Pryor have found themselves, with uncomfortable frequency,
in the company of Northern liberals when annual rankings of voting records are
published. This spring, an unabashedly liberal 31-year-old woman named Blanche
Lambert upset a 12-term Congressman, Bill Alexander, in the Democratic primary,
and is a good bet to defeat a Republican in November. Amazingly, she is from an
old planter family in the Delta.

If Bill Clinton is elected President, he will probably bring to Washington at
least a few Arkansawyers of the progressive-populist persuasion. Among those
likely to be chosen are Bruce Lindsey, another lawyer and Fulbright protege who
is perhaps Clinton's closest friend; Diane Blair and her husband, Jim, a former
Democratic national committeeman and a lawyer for Tyson Foods; Dr. Joycelyn
Elders, director of the Arkansas Department of Health, an advocate of
school-based health clinics that include sex education; Lee Williams, the
retired aide to Senator Fulbright who is probably one of the most knowledgeable
people in the nation on the workings of Congress; Robert J. Nash, head of the
Arkansas Development Finance Authority, which issues bonds to finance
construction in small municipalities and school districts; Rodney E. Slater, a
state highway commissioner and former Clinton aide, and Betsey Wright, a
longtime friend and former top assistant of Clinton's who is now the campaign's
director of research. Dr. Elders, Slater and Nash are black.

So when Bill Clinton tours the country advocating health-care reform, taxing the
rich, increasing spending for education and job creation, and, in the old
populist tradition, throwing the big-money rascals out, he is in no danger of
alienating his own home-state constituency.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In 1963, an impressionable Bill Clinton, then 17, visited the
Arkansas Senators J. W. Fulbright (right) and John McClellan in Washington.
Fulbright was among the first in Congress to oppose the Vietnam War. (Associated
Press); Yes, they wear shoes. A sing-along in Mountain View, 100 miles north of
Little Rock. A farm near Hope, once the hometown of a Presidential candidate.
(pg. 32-33)(Mitch Epstein for The New York Times); Talkin' 'bout a revolution?
Arkansas has many typical small towns like Scott, population 100, that don't
have typical small-town politics. (Mitch Epstein for The New York Times); Gov.
Orval Eugene Faubus, right, with Senator Fulbright in the 50's. In danger of
being labeled an integrationist, Faubus fought the Federal courts on
desegregation, but on many other issues favored progressive reform. (Arkansas
History Commission); Jeff Davis, a Governor and Senator from Arkansas at the
turn of the century, was the state's first famous populist. He ran all his
political races against Wall Street and "those high-collared roosters" in Little
Rock. (Brown Brothers); Carlisle, Ark., population 2,273, about 30 miles east of
Little Rock. Thanks to the Clintons, Arkansans have lost a little of their
suspicion of the rest of the United States. (Mitch Epstein for The New York
Times); Hattie Caraway, an Arkansan who in 1932 became the first woman elected
to a full term in the Senate. (Brown Brothers)(pg. 34-35)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN -- Issues: Free Trade;
Clinton Is Pressed to Take Stand on Pact

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Sept. 6


Gov. Bill Clinton, who is fond of seeking compromise where it did not previously
exist, may yet be forced into a corner as President Bush works to push him
toward taking a firm stand on the North American Free Trade Agreement that was
announced last month.

It is a delicate problem for Mr. Clinton that could expose one of his weakest
traits: his penchant for trying to have it both ways.

At various points in the campaign, Mr. Clinton has chosen obfuscation when a
direct answer held some risk. The most noteworthy instances were his
explanations of his military deferments during the Vietnam War and his
explanation of whether he had smoked marijuana.

The issue of free trade poses such a risk. Mr. Clinton takes a chance on
alienating an important group of supporters on one side, while giving the
Bush-Quayle forces ammunition on the other side to attack him for caving in to
labor interests.

Clinton Supports Concept

The trade agreement, if ratified by Congress, would make Canada, the United
States and Mexico the world's largest trading bloc. Representatives of organized
labor have denounced the pact outright, saying it would cost thousands of jobs.
But Republicans and business leaders have argued that a trade agreement would
increase exports and strengthen the economy.

Mr. Clinton has said he supports the concept of encouraging free trade to help
American exports, but he has also said he would support only an agreement that
called for strict protections for labor standards and the environment.

"I very much want to be for a trade agreement," Mr. Clinton said tonight in an
interview on NBC. "I hope I can be for this one but you've got to give me a
chance to read it and analyze it."

Last week Mr. Clinton told the A.F.L.-C.I.O.: "With Europe becoming more
integrated, and maybe more closed, with Asia becoming more integrated, and maybe
more closed, we have to have some markets. And that's why I hope we can get the
right kind of agreement with Mexico."

But Mr. Clinton has not taken a stand on what standards the agreement should
meet. His advisers say they will not formulate details until they have a chance
to scrutinize the complicated agreement, which is scheduled to be presented to
Congress on Tuesday.

Mr. Bush said gleefully last week that Mr. Clinton was going to have "straddle
sores" before it was all over. The President has made the trade agreement a
central feature of his campaign, and his aides plan to continue criticizing Mr.
Clinton on what they describe as his efforts to "backpedal" from supporting the
plan.

'Trying to Please All Parties'

"He is trying to please all parties," said Torie Clarke, a spokeswoman for the
Bush campaign. "That is not leadership."

Mr. Clinton's aides and supporters, naturally, disagree.

"He has been forthright in saying the free trade agreement done right can be a
good thing," said Gene B. Sperling, Mr. Clinton's economics adviser. "He
rejected the philosophical argument that a free trade agreement is inherently
bad."

So far, the Arkansas Governor has succeeded in deflecting questions on the
agreement, saying he needed to study the final document, which is enormous,
complex and not yet available to the public. Mr. Sperling says, "It's just not
intelligent to have a position yet."

Part of the reason is that union leaders see little alternative to backing the
Democrat this year. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. gave Mr. Clinton a pre-Labor Day
endorsement last week.

Waiting to See Agreement

Mr. Sperling said the only groups pressing the Clinton campaign to be more
specific on the trade agreement were the Republicans and trade lobbyists in
Washington.

"It would warm my heart if I got one phone call for Head Start for every 50
phone calls we get on trade issues," Mr. Sperling said.

Tom Donahue, the secretary-treasurer of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said he could accept
Mr. Clinton's position for now.

"Our position has been clear," Mr. Donahue said. "His has been, too. He has said
we ought to see the agreement, which I think is eminently responsible."

Mr. Donahue conceded that Mr. Clinton had to attend to political positioning in
the interest of winning more votes than just those of organized labor.

"He is a candidate for President of the United States," he said. "I'm not. I can
pop off about this."

Many labor unions were slow to support Mr. Clinton during the primary campaign,
citing his spotty labor record in Arkansas. But after seeing the Democratic
candidates many labor leaders preferred fall by the wayside -- first Senator Tom
Harkin of Iowa and then former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California -- they
have joined the Clinton fold.

Labor's Backing of Clinton

William H. Bywater, the president of the International Union of Electrical,
Radio and Machine Workers, said he was dead set against what he called "this
crazy free trade agreement" and has told Mr. Clinton about his objections.

"I'd like to hear Clinton come out and say, 'As far as I'm concerned, the wage
rates of workers in Mexico are far too low, and if you want to start raising the
standard of living in Mexico, then bring them up to the minimum in the United
States -- $4.25 an hour,' " he said. "That's what I think he should do."

Backing Mr. Clinton at this juncture has become the most pragmatic of decisions
for many labor leaders. Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., has said
Mr. Clinton need not take a position on the trade issue until after the
election. The trade issue could prove crucial in several states Mr. Clinton is
counting on to win, including Michigan and Illinois.

But it remains unclear whether these leaders speak for their rank-and-file
members, many of whom are suffering from job losses brought on by the closing or
relocation of manufacturing plants.

Danny Hoffman, the former auto worker who is now staff coordinator of the
University of Michigan's Labors Studies Center, said Mr. Clinton's position has
been "vague."

"I don't fault Clinton for saying he is in favor of trade," Mr. Hoffman said.
"But what I want to find out is what kind of restrictions are you willing to put
on Mexico?"

He said the auto workers he had talked to about the election were leaning toward
Mr. Clinton.

"They're saying anything's better than Bush," Mr. Hoffman said. "But it's not a
real clear choice right now."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 7, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In Prime Time;
Bush and Clinton Go After Each Other on NBC

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: HOT SPRINGS, Ark., Sept. 6


In what amounted to a televised kickoff for the fall campaign, President Bush
and Gov. Bill Clinton used a pair of back-to-back live interviews on NBC to
elaborate their core ideological differences, attack each other in relatively
genteel terms and defend their records.

To what seemed the clear annoyance of both men, the center section of each
interview with Tom Brokaw focused on issues of personal credibility that each
man intensely wishes would be gone.

For Mr. Clinton, the subject was his conflicting explanations of his behavior in
avoiding the draft during the Vietnam War. For Mr. Bush, it was the
long-lingering, and recently resurrected, question of whether as Vice President
he knew more than he has acknowledged about the Iran-contra affair in 1986.

'Just a Late Smokescreen'

Mr. Bush handled the question about the Iran-contra case fairly smoothly, airily
dismissing the notion that he had not told the truth about his activities.

"That's been looked into by millions of dollars' worth of investigations under
this Walsh hearing," he said, referring to Lawrence E. Walsh, the special
prosecutor in the Iran-contra case. "If I had done anything wrong, Tom, they'd
have been all over me like you can possibly imagine. This seems to me to be just
a late smokescreen out of that dead old saw out there."

Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, seemed angered by a question by Mr. Brokaw about
why he told reporters last week that he knew nothing about a news article in The
Los Angeles Times describing efforts by his uncle, Raymond Clinton, in 1968 to
secure a slot in the Naval Reserve for him, when, in fact, he had been told in
March of his uncle's efforts.

New Spending Without Taxes

"I didn't say that came as a surprise to me last week; it came as a total
surprise to me in March," Mr. Clinton began, in a statement that seemed both
somewhat confused and at times at variance with the facts. "The press described
The Los Angeles Times story to me in a totally different way. They never
mentioned this issue."

He added: "The truth is I have told the same story all along. Maybe I have not
handled it as well as I should have.

Mr. Clinton was much more self-assured when he told Mr. Brokaw that it would be
possible, in a Clinton Administration, to reduce the Federal deficit and start a
new array of spending programs without raising taxes.

"That is what I propose to do," he insisted. "That is what I believe will
happen." He conceded that he did not know for sure if he was right, but he said:
"Do I believe it? You bet I do -- because in my state that's what we have done."

In his interview Mr. Bush sought to soothe the anxiety of Americans over the
nation's economic problems.

"I think things are getting better," he said. "And I'll tell you one thing: We
are poised for a strong recovery. Interest rates are down. Inflation is down."

The President added: "We have had five consecutive quarters of growth; anemic
though they may have been, they've been growing. I'm not prepared to say I think
things are going to get dramatically worse at all."

Earlier today the President tossed the first ball at a baseball game in
Louisville, Ky., for the benefit of the victims of Hurricane Andrew, attended a
Polish-American festival in Chicago and finished his campaign day with the
television interview from Sault Ste. Marie, Mich.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview;
BUSH AND CLINTON PULL NO PUNCHES IN HOLIDAY RALLIES

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words


President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton opened their fall campaigns yesterday with
a struggle over the mantle of Harry S. Truman: Mr. Bush said Mr. Clinton lacked
the character to claim it; Mr. Clinton asserted that Mr. Bush was destroying the
very middle class that President Truman had helped to create.

Mr. Clinton chose Truman's hometown, Independence, Mo., for the Labor Day
kickoff to his campaign, presenting himself as the committed champion of "the
great American middle class" in the Truman tradition. In a rousing speech
delivered on the courthouse steps in a heavy rain, Mr. Clinton assailed Mr. Bush
as a man who did not recognize the nation's economic suffering, its aspirations
or its needs, and who had no right to claim political kinship with the
Democratic President from Missouri, as Mr. Bush has done in recent weeks.

"Harry Truman did not wake up every morning worrying about how to lower taxes
one more time on millionaires," Mr. Clinton declared. "Harry Truman gave the
special interests hell. George Bush is giving it to you, and it's time you took
your future back."

Sparring in the Midwest

Mr. Bush, campaigning at a picnic in Waukesha, Wis., acknowledged that it was an
uncertain time in the global economy, but he accused Mr. Clinton of trying "to
scare American workers so that he can slip into office with that failed
tax-and-spend policy of the past."

The President, who has frequently called up the memory of Truman's
come-from-behind victory in recent weeks, talked yesterday of Truman's
leadership traits, and asserted that Mr. Clinton fell far short of them. Opening
a new line of Republican attack, an energized Mr. Bush declared: "Harry Truman
was a man of decisiveness, not equivocation. He'd find little in common with
Governor Clinton, a man who hedges or ducks on almost every tough issue."

Mr. Bush also mounted an indirect attack on Mr. Clinton's lack of military
service during the Vietnam War, an issue that has dogged the Governor from
Arkansas in recent days and that prompted an angry outburst from him yesterday
morning. Accusing reporters of engaging in a "feeding frenzy" over an old issue,
Mr. Clinton asserted it was time for them to direct their aggressiveness toward
Mr. Bush and the Iran-contra affair. [Page A17.]


The day's exchanges came as Mr. Clinton campaigned in Missouri and Ohio before
ending the day in Connecticut, and Mr. Bush roared through Wisconsin and
Michigan, all considered important swing states this fall. While Labor Day has
traditionally marked the start of the general election campaign, the tone of the
day underscored a struggle that has been going on for weeks.

The Truman debate arises in a year when voters, implicitly or explicitly, seem
to be looking for plain-spoken, truth-telling leadership. Ross Perot evoked many
comparisons to Truman earlier this year. And Mr. Bush, when his poll ratings
sank this summer, began comparing himself to Truman, who in 1948 won re-election
against the odds by beating Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York. Mr. Clinton sought
yesterday to reclaim the popular memory of Truman for the Democrats.

Beyond the battle over Truman, the day offered a case study in the themes
expected to dominate the next 56 days. Mr. Bush argued that his domestic plans
have been stymied by a "gridlock Congress," that he was committed to ensuring
"economic security" in his next Administration, and that the nation was on the
mend and on the rise.

'Beneath the Rhetoric'

"My opponent will kick off his campaign with a message of fear," said Mr. Bush,
who began a full day of campaigning with a walk across a five-mile bridge in
upper Michigan, and pressed the flesh with gusto along the rope lines this
afternoon. But he urged voters "to look beneath the rhetoric and look at the
facts."

Campaigning later in Hamtramck, Mich., where he marched in a Polish-American
parade, Mr. Bush also defended his emphasis on foreign policy in his first term.

"There are those who tell me that foreign policy doesn't matter," Mr. Bush
declared to an audience composed heavily of Polish and other Eastern
European-Americans. "I say, tell that to the immigrants of America. Tell that to
our children, who can sleep free of the nuclear nightmare and dream the sweet
dream of peace."

Mr. Clinton argued that the nation was at a turning point and badly needed a new
economic course. "This election provides Americans their clearest choice in a
generation," he declared in Missouri. "A choice between hope and fear, between
running in place and moving ahead, between more of the same old trickle down and
embarking on a new course to guarantee old opportunities in the American Dream."

Mr. Clinton dismissed the Republicans' charge that his election would mean a
throwback to "tax and spend" liberalism. "We've got to go beyond trickle-down
economics," he said, "not back to tax and spend, but ahead to invest, and
educate, and cooperate, and compete, and grow -- putting people first."

In recalling Truman, he said the former President had left as a legacy "the
great American middle class," which he described as "the generation of Americans
who went to college because of the G.I. Bill, who were able to buy a home
because of F.H.A. and V.A. mortgages, who raised my generation with the hope and
the opportunity that all things were possible."

"George Bush's legacy." he said, "is the destruction of that very middle class."

He added: "He has blamed his failures on everything from the Federal Reserve to
Saddam Hussein, from Congress to consumers to the press. He says the recession
is really over; we just don't know it. And if it's not really over, it is
because we have an attitude problem. The buck doesn't stop with George Bush; it
doesn't even slow down there."

'Waffling and Wavering'

Mr. Bush, speaking earlier in the day in Wisconsin, set up his own Truman test.
He noted that the Missouri Democrat knew what it meant to be a businessman and a
political underdog, "and so do I."

The President then proceeded to mine a vulnerability that has caused problems
for Mr. Clinton in the past: the charge that he is a straddler.  "Whether it was
the Soviet blockade of Berlin or the invasion of Korea, Harry Truman never
flinched from the tough decision," Mr. Bush said. "Contrast that with Governor
Clinton's waffling and wavering about whether he would have followed my lead and
stood up to Saddam Hussein and his naked aggression."

Mr. Clinton managed to escape the rain at his second stop of the day, an
A.F.L.-C.I.O. rally in Cincinnati, where he was joined by his running mate,
Senator Al Gore. Hillary Clinton, who was at the rally as well, received the
longest and most sustained applause of the event.

Vice-Presidential Campaigning

Senator Al Gore, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, spent part of his day
at an event that captured the party's traditions: a rally in downtown Detroit,
attended by Owen Bieber, the head of the United Automobile Workers, Mayor
Coleman Young, and a host of other Democratic luminaries. Mr. Gore said the
steel in the bridge that Mr. Bush had crossed in Michigan that morning was made
at a U.S. Steel plant shut down earlier this year.

"Mr. Bush, you can walk across the bridge for a photo opportunity, but you've
got to be thinking about the jobs of the people who built that bridge that you
just put out of work," Mr. Gore declared.

Vice President Quayle, who had begun a Western swing in Colorado, criticized Mr.
Gore, asserting that his rival's environmental policies would lead to higher
taxes.

Mr. Quayle also told an enthusiastic audience at Mesa State College that Mr.
Clinton had chosen as his running mate a man who was, when it came to spending,
"bigger than Ted Kennedy, bigger than Howard Metzenbaum, bigger than Tim Wirth."
Mr. Quayle also said that President Bush realized that raising taxes was a
mistake, and the Democrats "just don't get it."

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, campaigned yesterday
in Independence, Mo., in front of a statue of Harry S. Truman, while President
Bush led a five-mile walk across the Mackinac Bridge in Michigan. (Photographs
by Associated Press) (pg. A1); President Bush getting a glimpse of the crowd
from backstage at a Republican Party picnic in Milwaukee. (Agence France-Presse)
(pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Packaging Clinton and Gore as One

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: CINCINNATI, Sept. 7


It is Labor Day, the traditional beginning of the fall campaign and does Gov.
Bill Clinton know where his Vice-Presidential running mate is? Darn right. All
he has to do is look to his side and there is Senator Al Gore -- where he is
much of the time.

They are to Presidential politics what Bartels and James are to wine, Ben and
Jerry are to ice cream and Click and Clack, the Tappet brothers, are to silly
but sage advice about cars: two men packaged as a single product.

Whether they are appearing in shirt-sleeves and chinos at a sultry, sunset Labor
Day picnic in Cincinnati, building houses with former President Jimmy Carter,
receiving the endorsement of the Sierra Club, holding a news conference with
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel or motoring about on one of their bus
trips, the two men always seem to be within hailing distance of each other.

'They're Joined at the Hip'

It is more than merely an impression. Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore have campaigned
together on 20 of the 52 days since the end of the Democratic convention in
July. It is a record of joint appearances that some observers and campaign aides
say is highly unusual.

"I haven't looked at it really closely but just off the top of my head these two
seem like they're joined at the hip," said Hugh Heclo, professor of public
affairs at George Mason University.

Campaign aides say the dual campaigning is a deliberate attempt to capitalize on
the strengths each man -- and each man's wife -- brings to the ticket, and to
demonstrate that the sum of the package is worth more than its individual
components.

"There really is a sense with this group that 2 plus 2 equals 10, rather than
just 4," said Mark Gearan, Mr. Gore's campaign manager.

Since President Bush almost never shares a stage with Vice President Dan Quayle,
the subtext is to draw comparisons between the Democratic package and the
Republican one.

Kevin Phillips, the conservative political analyst, said he suspected that the
joint campaigning "is designed to underscore the duality of them in terms of
qualifications."

"That's important because you have a President who has to play 'hide from the
Vice President,' " he said. "When you have a candidate who says his Vice
President is his peer and can take over for him at a moment's notice, it makes
it clear that nobody, including many Republicans, wants Dan Quayle to take over,
at any notice."

Aides to Mr. Gore acknowledge that part of the goal is to make Mr. Quayle a
campaign issue. "There is no question that we are running against Bush and
Quayle, and not just Bush," Mr. Gearan said.

The tactic is not new. In 1988 aides to Michael S. Dukakis felt that when voters
compared Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas with Mr. Quayle, there would be a rush
to the Democratic ticket. But the Massachusetts Governor made less than six
joint appearances with Mr. Bentsen during the campaign, and polls showed later
that Mr. Quayle had minimal impact on voter preference.

This time the Democrats want to heightenthe issue .

"There is consistent research that indicates people do not make decisions based
on the Vice-Presidential choice," Mr. Heclo said. "So they are not trying to
compare Gore and Quayle. Instead it seems they are trying to compare the team of
Clinton-Gore and Clinton's good judgment in selecting him with the team of Bush
and Quayle and Bush's bad judgment in selecting him."

A Clone of Clinton

There are other dynamics at work as well. With two candidates in their mid-40's,
the presence of Mr. Gore beside Mr. Clinton highlights the Democrats' theme of
generational change. And unlike other Vice-Presidential choices who are selected
for regional balance, Mr. Gore is in many ways a clone of the Democratic
nominee. Both are moderates, Southerners, baby boomers.

But while the two are alike in many ways, there are enough crucial differences
to provide balance. Mr. Clinton is the campaigner who cannot find enough hands
to shake. Mr. Gore, though much improved from 1988, when he campaigned in the
Democratic primaries, is still somewhat stiff.

Mr. Clinton has extensive experience in courting black voters and is at ease in
the pulpit of a black Baptist church. Mr. Gore almost never appears in similar
settings and when he does, seems not to know what to say.

Conversely, Mr. Gore's environmental record helps Mr. Clinton, whose record on
the environment as Governor of Arkansas is decidedly mixed. And as a Vietnam
veteran, Mr. Gore can offset -- though by how much is debatable -- questions
about how Mr. Clinton avoided being drafted.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton and Senator Al Gore have campaigned together
on 20 of the 52 days since the end of the Democratic convention in July. (Lee
Romero/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Attack;
CLINTON ACCUSES REPORTERS OF BIAS

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: INDEPENDENCE, Mo., Sept. 7


Gov. Bill Clinton, who has grown increasingly frustrated and angry over
questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, lashed out at the press
today, saying reporters had made no similar effort to query President Bush on
his involvement in the Iran-contra affair.

Mr. Clinton for the first time brought up reported comments by former Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger suggesting that Mr. Bush may have known about the
arms-for-hostages deal. Mr. Clinton said Mr. Bush's actions may have
demonstrated "support for illegal conduct."

By contrast, he said, the questions about people who exerted influence on behalf
of Mr. Clinton and his military status should not have amounted to "a hill of
beans."

'You All Don't Even Ask'

"There is a memorandum of a conversation between two Cabinet members who were --
unlike these guys who were not my political friends -- were in the Reagan-Bush
Cabinet, which, if true, would call into question not only the President's
veracity, but his support for illegal conduct, which you all don't even ask him
about," Mr. Clinton told reporters today, as a small group of supporters cheered
him and attempted to shout down the reporters' questions.

The memorandum to which Mr. Clinton referred was written in 1987 by an executive
assistant to Secretary of State George P. Shultz and recounted a telephone
conversation between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger.

According to the notes, included in court documents, Mr. Weinberger expressed
indignation that Mr. Bush had played down his role in the Iran-contra affair in
an interview with The Washington Post.

Mr. Clinton said that any inconsistencies in Mr. Bush's comments should be
treated far more seriously than reports about his own draft history. The Los
Angeles Times reported last week, and other news organizations have confirmed,
that Mr. Clinton's uncle Raymond attempted to get him out of the war by securing
him a spot in the Naval Reserve.

After that report, Mr. Clinton first said he knew nothing of his uncle's
actions, but later acknowledged that someone had informed him of it last March.

Assumes Point Man's Role

In his response to questions today, Mr. Clinton broke away from a plan worked
out within his campaign organization that called for the Vice Presidential
nominee, Senator Al Gore, or for Mr. Clinton's advisers -- not Mr. Clinton
himself -- to attack Mr. Bush on the Iran-contra matter.

Mr. Bush, who has generally avoided criticism of Mr. Clinton on the military
matter, today took a sharp, though indirect, swipe. At a picnic near Milwaukee,
in a series of comparisons between himself and Harry S. Truman, the President
said: "Harry Truman wanted to join the military and fight for his country. And
so do I. And I did. Harry Truman prided himself on his own military service."

Mr. Clinton was asked today what Mr. Bush's past statements on the Iran-contra
affair say about what kind of a man the President is.

"You do your job with him like you did with me," he responded.

In the testy exchange with reporters, Mr. Clinton said that "even if all this
stuff is true, it doesn't change anything about what I knew or did at the time."

He added, "You've got a feeding frenzy on about something that even if it's
true, doesn't amount to a hill of beans."

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
How Ben Sachs Came to Blow Himself Up

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 851 words



Leviathan
By Paul Auster
275 pages. Viking. $21.

"Leviathan," Paul Auster's seventh novel, starts out with a bang: "Six days
ago," his narrator begins, "a man blew himself up by the side of a road in
northern Wisconsin. There were no witnesses, but it appears that he was sitting
on the grass next to his parked car when the bomb he was building accidentally
went off. According to the forensic reports that have just been published, the
man was killed instantly. His body burst into dozens of small pieces, and
fragments of his corpse were found as far as 50 feet away from the site of the
explosion."

Who was this man who blew himself up? What was he doing with a homemade bomb?
And what circumstances brought him to this violent end? Those are the questions
addressed by the rest of Mr. Auster's elliptical novel, questions that give him
plenty of opportunity to deal with the themes of identity, chance and the
elusiveness of truth that have animated all his fiction from "City of Glass"
(1985) through "Moon Palace" (1989) and "The Music of Chance" (1990).

The name of the man with the bomb, we quickly learn, was Ben Sachs and he was
the best friend of Mr. Auster's narrator, Peter Aaron. Confronted by F.B.I.
agents who are investigating the bomb blast, Peter decides to try to piece
together the story of Ben's life himself. He starts by reviewing their 15-year
friendship.

"The journey must have been so long for him," Peter says, "so horrible, so
fraught with suffering, I can scarcely think about it without wanting to cry. In
15 years, Sachs traveled from one end of himself to the other, and by the time
he came to that last place, I doubt he even knew who he was anymore. So much
distance had been covered by then, it wouldn't have been possible for him to
remember where he had begun."

When the two first meet, both are struggling novelists. Ben strikes Peter as a
gangly Ichabod Crane "with a thousand wheels turning in his head." Ben has a
reputation as a troublemaker -- he is constantly raging against the stupidities
of the world -- but he's also charming, garrulous and completely lacking in
self-consciousness. Peter admires Ben's idealism, his commitment to the stern
principles of Henry David Thoreau, and he envies Ben's seemingly perfect
marriage to the beautiful and devoted Fanny.

All is not as it seems, however. Peter learns that there are dangerous fault
lines in Ben's marriage, and that Ben himself has begun to doubt his work, his
beliefs, his goals. These doubts come crashing down on Ben one night, when he
somehow topples off a fire escape during a party, falls four stories and nearly
dies. For days after the fall, Ben refuses to speak to anyone; and even when he
recovers his health, he evinces a strange new alienation. "I want to end the
life I've been living up to now," he says. "I want everything to change. If I
don't manage to do that, I'm going to be in deep trouble. My whole life has been
a waste, a stupid little joke, a dismal string of petty failures. I'm going to
be 41 years old next week, and if I don't take hold of things now, I'm going to
drown. I'm going to sink like a stone to the bottom of the world."

Ben does, in fact, change his life. He leaves Fanny, moves to Vermont and begins
work on a book. Then, abruptly, he disappears. Communications with Peter and
with Fanny cease, and his cabin is found deserted. His manuscript, along with
everything else, has been abandoned.

Eventually, Peter will piece together the story of Ben's disappearance, a story
that involves Ben's chance encounters with two eccentric women: a photographer,
Maria, who likes to follow strangers around with her camera, and her best
friend, Lillian, a former prostitute who is married to a Vietnam vet, Reed.
Through a violent, chance encounter, Reed will become Ben's alter ego, and in so
doing, he will determine the direction of the rest of Ben's life.

As in all of Mr. Auster's other novels, coincidence and random meetings play an
enormous role in "Leviathan": in fact we realize that Ben's life is literally
made up of a series of bizarre, improbable events ricocheting into one another,
and connected by little more than the phrase "then something strange happened."
No doubt these events are supposed to make us ponder the arbitrary nature of
life and the mysterious workings of cause and effect, just as the conflicting
versions of Ben's life given to Peter by various friends are meant to underscore
the subjective nature of truth, the malleability of identity.

But while many of the incidents in "Leviathan" are entertaining, even gripping,
they do not add up to a persuasive story. Perhaps because Mr. Auster is so
reluctant to speculate about his characters' behavior or probe the recesses of
their inner lives, there is a hollowness at the core of this novel. Ben's
journey toward destruction devolves into an unemotional game of connect the
dots, while Ben himself comes across as less a person than a collection of
abstract qualities glued provisionally together. A disappointing novel by a
dextrous and prolific writer.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:
Photo of Paul Auster (Arturo Patten/Viking)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: In the Background;
Democrats Charge 'Dirty Tricks' Over Draft Issue

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


As President Bush's re-election campaign intensified its public assault on Gov.
Bill Clinton's draft record today, Democrats accused their opponents of
resorting to "dirty tricks" to press the issue behind the scenes.

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, a wounded World War II veteran, took the Senate
floor on behalf of the Bush campaign to denounce the Democratic Presidential
nominee for telling "tall tales" about how he avoided serving in Vietnam. He
went on to say: "Let me be clear -- the fact that Bill Clinton avoided military
service and did not go to Vietnam are not the issues here. The real issues now
are trust, confidence and credibility, and on these three critical standards
Bill Clinton is flunking the test."

Democratic and Clinton campaign officials, meanwhile, accused Republicans of
seeking to disrupt several Clinton appearances over the past few days with a
single-engine plane overhead towing a banner with the message, "No Draft Dodger
for President."

Encouraged by Local Officials

Phil Roof, who was the Bush-Quayle finance chairman for South Carolina during
the primaries, said in a telephone interview that he and State Representative
James Harrison, a Republican, paid $600 for the plane to make two fly-bys at
Clinton events. He said they were encouraged by local Bush campaign officials,
who "helped me get the logistics set up."

"I'm just getting tired of everybody being pro-Clinton," said Mr. Roof, who
rents space in his building to the Bush-Quayle campaign, "and I'm just getting
tired of hearing all this hogwash about his draft. Bush served honorably in the
service, and I want a man whose got real character."

He said he had nothing to do with another plane that flew overhead before a
Clinton event in Cincinnati on Monday with a banner that read, "Draft Dodger."

Carol Darr, a lawyer for the Democratic National Committee, said the planes
exemplified underhanded campaign tactics.

"It's self-evidently a dirty trick," she said. "If it weren't a dirty trick they
wouldn't try to hide it by having a state rep do it."

Ms. Darr acknowledged that she had no evidence that the Republican Party or the
Bush campaign was behind the airplane incidents.

In another example that Democrats cite as demonstrating how far Republicans will
go to attack Mr. Clinton as they try to hold on to their Southern base, a
newsletter being distributed in Alabama seeks to ridicule Mr. Clinton and his
family.

The newsletter, produced by the Greater Birmingham Young Republicans, includes a
picture of Mr. Clinton, his wife, Hillary, and their daughter, Chelsea, on the
podium at the Democratic convention with Reggie Jackson, a 12-year-old black boy
who sang "America the Beautiful."

The heading under the photograph reads, "Future Shock." The caption says: "In
case you've read through this entire newsletter and still aren't convinced that
this election is most important, take a look at this photograph and tell me you
can handle this family as the First Family. Does not daughter Chelsea (named
after the 60's Judy Collins hit folk song 'Chelsea Morning') remind you just a
little too much of the last Democratic First Daughter we had, Amy Carter?"

And, referring to the young singer, the caption goes on: "And who is the short
fellow with the bow tie? Perhaps it's because I'm biased, certainly, but there's
just something non-Presidential about this whole Clinton family. Arkansas may
deserve this, but not the nation!"

Racial Slant Is Denied

The leaflet was put out by Joseph Sanders, a local Republican worker, who said
in an interview with The Boston Globe that no racial slant was intended.

Mr. Clinton said the flyer was "typical of the politics of fear and division
promoted by the Bush-Quayle Administration, campaign and convention in Houston."

Richard Dent, the Alabama spokesman for the Clinton-Gore campaign, said the
flyer "just shows how low and slimy the Republicans in this state will sink to
get a vote."

Asked whether he would endorse or disavow the leaflet and the plane flights,
Rich Bond, the Republican national chairman, said through a spokesman that he
had no comment.

Such campaign tactics are not new, and Democrats, too, have pulled their share
of stunts to put a negative spotlight on their opponents. Even as he criticized
the Republicans today for a "political trick" in sending the plane over Clinton
events, George Stephanopoulos, communications director for the Clinton campaign,
said he tried the tactic once when he worked for Michael S. Dukakis, the
Democratic nominee in 1988.

Boston Incident Recalled

He recalled that as Mr. Bush was delivering a speech at Boston Harbor about Mr.
Dukakis's environmental record, the Democratic campaign hired a plane with a
banner that read "something like, 'Bush Equals Toxic Waste.' "

The Democrats also accused Republicans of spreading false information about a
Clinton rally last Saturday at the University of South Carolina in Columbia. The
South Carolina Young Democrats had distributed a flyer saying the rally would
take place from 3:30 P.M. to 5 P.M. But the Democrats found that on the morning
of the event, other people on campus were distributing a look-alike flyer
falsely saying that the event would be held from 5:30 P.M. to 7 P.M.

Democratic officials said they caught on to the trick and were able to alert
Clinton backers on campus.

The speech today by Mr. Dole, the Senate minority leader, came as the Bush
campaign has been steadily building the sharpness and frequency of its attacks
on Mr. Clinton over the draft.

Mr. Dole introduced into the Senate record a thick sheaf of documents compiled
by the Bush campaign listing conflicting statements, purportedly by Mr. Clinton,
on the draft since 1978.

The Senator said Mr. Clinton should "come clean" and make a major public
statement to clear the record.

"If in this time of personal political crisis, if it amounts to making your own
'Checkers speech,' so be it," Mr. Dole said, referring to Richard M. Nixon's
1952 apologia as the Republican Vice-Presidential nominee. "And if it means
holding a no-holds-barred news conference, so be it."

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Profile;
Quayle's Right Hand: a Contrarian Tries to Remold Boss's Image

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


When everyone else at Harvard was marching against the war in Vietnam, William
Kristol was defending it as a righteous cause. When they were rallying for the
equal rights amendment, he was testifying against it at a Senate hearing. While
others were lampooning Richard M. Nixon, he was wearing a Spiro Agnew sweatshirt
around campus "just to shock people."

Proudly contrarian by nature, Mr. Kristol was openly contemptuous of the
"cocksure radicals who thought they were the smartest generation ever and that
none of the traditions were worth preserving." He kept his hair short. He says
he did not smoke marijuana. He had little time for Jimi Hendrix or the Doors.
"He was far too rigorous to compare Bob Dylan to W. B. Yeats," said R. Emmett
Tyrrell, a boyhood friend who went on to become editor of The American
Spectator.

When Marilyn Quayle reminded the Republican convention last month that "not
everyone joined the counterculture -- not everyone demonstrated, dropped out,
took drugs, joined in the sexual revolution or dodged the draft," perhaps it was
Mr. Kristol, her husband's chief of staff, she had in mind.

Unlikely Combination

At first glance the pairing of Dan Quayle and Bill Kristol might seem the
unlikeliest of combinations.

Mr. Quayle was a C student and self-confessed "late bloomer" from Huntington,
Ind., a town where a night out meant cruising to the A & W root beer stand. Mr.
Kristol grew up in what Mr. Tyrrell called "an endless intellectual salon," the
Upper West Side home of his parents, Irving Kristol, the neoconservative sage,
and Gertrude Himmelfarb, a noted historian of the Victorian era. He graduated as
valedictorian from the exclusive Collegiate School in Manhattan, sailed through
undergraduate school at Harvard in three years, then earned a Ph.D. and taught
political philosophy there.

But for a man who thrives on being in the minority -- "there are too many
Republicans now," he grouses -- there may have been no more fulfilling job in
politics than plotting the rehabilitation of Mr. Quayle.

The relationship has proven mutually beneficial beyond imagination. It has given
Mr. Quayle the intellectual cachet and strategic discipline he so badly needed.
And it has given the 39-year-old Mr. Kristol a vehicle, a way to move his
conservative agenda from the obscure journals of the New Right all the way to
the White House.

The 'Smartest Guy' Around

To the extent that Mr. Quayle has become the Bush Administration's leading voice
on issues like "family values" and civil justice reform, and chipped away at his
caricature in the process, Mr. Kristol has received much of the credit.

Some in the Vice President's office protest that Mr. Kristol has received too
much credit for Mr. Quayle's successes. His colleagues have mocked him
relentlessly since The Wall Street Journal quoted James Pinkerton, a former
White House aide, calling him the "smartest guy in the White House."

Irving Kristol told his son drily that the compliment was faint praise. But when
Mr. Quayle's press secretary, David C. Beckwith, is thrown a tough question now,
he likes to respond, "Where's the smartest guy in the White House when you need
him?"

Mr. Quayle believes that news reports characterizing Mr. Kristol as "Dan
Quayle's brain," as The New Republic did in 1990, are just the latest evidence
that the press refuses to treat him fairly.

"I don't particularly care for it," Mr. Quayle said in a recent interview. "I'm
sure Bill doesn't, either. Bill offers a lot to me and what I've done as Vice
President. But I'm the one that sets the agenda. I come up with the direction
that we want to go. I'm the one that's coming up with ideas."

Barbs for 'the New Class'

And yet, both the strategy and policies of Mr. Quayle's Vice Presidency bear Mr.
Kristol's imprint. Perhaps most notable is Mr. Quayle's demonization of what he
calls "the cultural elite," a group that Irving Kristol, co-editor of the
conservative journal The Public Interest, labeled years ago as "the new class."

Many critics have said Mr. Kristol is as much a part of the cultural elite as
anybody could be. But he said the cultural elite, as identified by Mr. Quayle,
is defined by its attitudes, not its class or its intellectualism.

"He's used the term to refer to people who look down on middle-class bourgeois
values," Mr. Kristol said. "It's a shallow sophistication, not generic culture.
It's bicoastal snobbery, and I think that's worth criticizing."

Mr. Kristol also has longstanding beliefs, based at least partly on the
teachings of the 20th-century political philosopher Leo Strauss, about the
importance of what has come to be known as family values.

"I came to conservatism from the point of view that ultimately a country is
judged by the character and values of its people," Mr. Kristol said. "That's the
great lesson of the social programs of the last 30 years. We've had material
progress and technological progress, and we still have terrible problems."

Before he joined the Government, Mr. Kristol wrote in a 1985 article for the
Heritage Foundation's Policy Review that "the political executive ought not to
be afraid of publicity or controversy," and added, "In politics, unlike
football, there is no referee who makes sure you have a turn on offense."

Dan in the Lion's Den

Seven years later, that truism provides the strategic foundation for virtually
everything Mr. Quayle says and does. Although he has more reason than most
politicians to shy away from publicity, he has eagerly pursued it with gimmicks
aimed at grabbing headlines.

When Mr. Quayle proposed judicial changes that would slash lawyers' fees, he
chose to give the speech in the lion's den: the annual convention of the
American Bar Association. When he wanted to relate the Los Angeles riots to the
deterioration of the nuclear family, he guaranteed attention by including a
paragraph about a television show he had never watched.

The reference to Murphy Brown was not Mr. Kristol's idea. But he recognized that
it would make waves, and he believed firmly that the publicity would outweigh
any potential backlash. He ordered that the speech not be faxed to the White
House until an hour or two before it was to be delivered, a tactic that some
Quayle aides saw as his way to muffle dissent from President Bush's more
cautious handlers.

Thus far, Mr. Quayle's emphasis on family values has yielded mixed results. Last
week Mr. Kristol and other Quayle aides conceded that the debate had veered off
track, and Mr. Quayle had to devote an entire speech to regaining control of the
issue.

Access to the White House

A key to Mr. Kristol's success has been that, while committed to conservatism,
he is rarely doctrinaire.

And, for a Vice-Presidential aide, he has had uncommon access to the White
House. He participates in most major staff meetings, although many of his
recommendations, like maintaining the President's no-tax pledge, have been
disregarded.

His high profile has caused some anxiety. Two former White House chiefs of
staff, John H. Sununu and Samuel K. Skinner, disliked his chumminess with the
press and questioned his loyalty. Like many conservatives, Mr. Kristol has not
disguised his occasional disappointment with the President, even during the
campaign.

"I'm much less sure that we deserve to win than that the country doesn't deserve
for the Democrats to win," he said in an interview last week.

Speaking Well of the Boss

Several of Mr. Kristol's confidantes said they have never heard him speak
condescendingly about Mr. Quayle.

"He respects his political skills," said Jeremy A. Rabkin, a graduate school
colleague who now teaches at Cornell. "I don't think he would nominate Quayle to
be a professor at Harvard, but I think there are a lot of professors at Harvard
that he wouldn't nominate to be professors at Harvard."

Although he is not committed to working for Mr. Quayle if the President is
re-elected, Mr. Kristol said he would support Mr. Quayle unequivocally for the
1996 Republican Presidential nomination, even if other friends like Jack F. Kemp
and William J. Bennett are in the race.

"Honesty requires one to say that no one's a hero to his valet, and one would
have qualms about anyone, I think," Mr. Kristol said. "But I'm totally confident
that he is capable of being President. None of us is perfect, but he has very
sound character and judgment."


NAME: William Kristol

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William Kristol, who is plotting the political rehabilitation of
Vice President Dan Quayle. (Michael A. Schwartz for The New York Times)

Chart: "William Kristol"

Born: Dec. 23, 1952, New York City.

Current Home: McLean, Va.

Education: Collegiate School, New York City (1970); Harvard University, A.B.
(1973) and Ph.D. (1979).

Career Highlights: Assistant professor of political science, University of
Pennsylvania, 1978-83; assistant professor of public policy, Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University, 1983-85; chief of staff and special assistant to
Education Secretary William Bennett, 1985-88; campaign manager, Alan Keyes for
U.S. Senate (Maryland), 1988; domestic policy adviser to the Vice President,
1989; chief of staff to the Vice President, 1989 to present.

Family: Married to the former Susan Scheinberg. Three children -- Rebecca, 9;
Anne, 7; and Joseph, 4.

Interests: Political philosophy, spectator sports, classical music.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 10, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
G.O.P. Looks at Clinton Draft Record and Spies Willie Horton

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 9


Have the Republicans found their furlough issue for 1992?

Four years ago, the Bush campaign used a Massachusetts prison release program to
chip away at Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, asking what kind of man would give weekend
passes to convicted murderers like Willie Horton. The past few weeks suggest
that the Republicans are testing to see if they can use Gov. Bill Clinton's
draft record, and his shifting explanations of it over the years, in a similar
fashion in the next 54 days.

Then as now, the goal is to find a single issue that crystallizes broader doubts
about the character and the values of the opposition. The Republicans then
develop the theme to full force through disciplined repetition by their
candidate, his campaign aides, an army of surrogates, and, ultimately,
television advertising, to the point where it can shatter a political persona.

The drumbeat on the draft is clearly escalating. On Tuesday, Senator Bob Dole of
Kansas was on the floor of the Senate, urging Mr. Clinton to "come clean." On
Wednesday, Patrick J. Buchanan was on CBS "This Morning," asserting that a man
who "dodged the draft" in Vietnam was unfit to be Commander in Chief. Almost
every day, new press releases come from the Bush-Quayle headquarters, accusing
Mr. Clinton of contradicting himself or covering up the truth about why he did
not serve in the military in the Vietnam War.

A Fumbling Response

There is a potential for backlash in this. Ronald H. Brown, the chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, says his party has spent much of the past few
years warning the American people that the Republicans would try to distract
them from the ailing economy in this election. "One of the things we've done is
get the American people ready for this kind of tactic," Mr. Brown said in an
interview today.

Clinton aides also say they relish a confrontation over trustworthiness and
candor with a President who promised "no new taxes" and a vibrant economy. And
the issue of the Vietnam War itself is not without salience for Vice President
Dan Quayle, who fulfilled his military obligation in the Indiana National Guard.
Still, the Clinton campaign's handling of the issue has been fumbling and
awkward, particularly since a Los Angeles Times article last week prompted new
scrutiny of about how he managed to avoid the draft, notably the efforts of a
late uncle to lobby on his behalf.

Mr. Clinton gave various responses about when he knew about his uncle's
activities, then on Monday angrily lashed out at reporters who pressed him on
the issue.

Senior advisers in the Bush campaign see the draft issue, which they all but
acknowledge will be used in television advertising, as a rich line of attack in
several respects. First and foremost, they say, the issue goes to Mr. Clinton's
credibility; they are trying to depict the Democratic nominee as someone who
stretches the truth to please the audience of the day, someone so ambitious that
he will say anything to win, someone who is, in short, "slick."

Character vs. Issues

"It's not about the draft, it's about the truth, and trustworthiness," said Mary
Matalin, deputy manager for the Bush campaign. "It's a very clear illumination
of a character flaw." This fits into the overarching concept that Bush
strategists have for this campaign: one that revolves not around the economy, or
change vs. the status quo, but trust and leadership traits.

Mr. Bush himself implicitly uses the Clinton draft history as a missing
ingredient in the Democrat's qualifications to be Commander in Chief: In this
week's struggle over which candidate was the most appropriate heir to Harry
Truman, Mr. Bush noted that both he and Mr. Truman had served happily and
proudly in the military.

Finally, some Bush advisers see Mr. Clinton's lack of military service and the
opposition he voiced toward the Vietnam War at the time as an important wedge
issue with more conservative voters, like Reagan Democrats and Southerners.
Among some voters, the draft could set off the same kind of resonant contrast
that the Pledge of Allegiance issue did four years ago, in which the Republicans
made claim to the symbols and traditions of nationhood.

The Economy as Topic A

Still, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, an expert in political communication at the
University of Pennsylvania, discounts that aspect of the draft issue.  "The
level of moral ambiguity surrounding that war was sufficiently high that it is
difficult for many people to analogize it to the war George Bush served in," she
said.

The more serious charge, Ms. Jamieson said, would involve candor and
truth-telling, which the Democrats tried this week to turn back on Mr. Bush by
questioning his role in the Iran-contra affair.

The broader question, some political experts say, is whether the draft issue can
break through the voters' consuming interest in the economy.

"I still think the overriding issue here is the economy and jobs," said Merle
Black, an expert on Southern politics at Emory University in Atlanta. But Mr.
Black and several other analysts added, "You really don't see the full impact of
the draft issue until it goes on television."

In the meantime, the Clinton campaign is trying to return to its message.
"Governor Clinton has made his statement, he's answered the questions, it's time
to move on to the economy and what the candidates are going to do on issues that
matter to real people," said George Stephanopoulos, deputy manager of the
Clinton campaign.

But the press releases on the draft keep coming.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Facing Draft Questions, Clinton Avoids the Press

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Sept. 10


Stung by recurring questions about his credibility, Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas took refuge today behind the unblinking eye of a camera and the
long-distance questions of television anchors in Detroit to try to control the
coverage of his campaign.

The Clinton campaign, which is normally eager to have the candidate appear
before the press to criticize President Bush whenever it looks like the
Republicans might dominate news coverage, instead canceled a news briefing as
well as plans to hold a news conference.

The concern, apparently, was that Mr. Clinton might find himself on the
defensive instead of the offensive, answering nagging questions about whether
strings were pulled to get him out of the draft during the Vietnam War.

Trying to Focus on Economy

"The subject today is the economy," said George Stephanopoulos, the campaign's
communications director. "And Bush's speech is on the economy."

Dee Dee Myers, the press secretary, said, "It is our right to try to keep the
debate focused on the economy."

This is not so different from what the White House routinely does to shelter the
President from impromptu and unwelcome questioning. During the Reagan years, the
White House was often able to practice the successful strategy of selecting the
topic the President would focus on that day and making sure no one -- least of
all a reporter -- changed the subject.

But the Clinton campaign has gone to special lengths this week. On Wednesday, a
campaign aide, Steve Rabinowitz, physically blocked a network producer when she
attempted to ask the Democratic nominee a question when he was shaking hands
after a speech. Mr. Rabinowitz then scolded the producer for even trying.

And as Mr. Clinton strode back and forth to his limousine or chartered plane
between speeches, he ignored questions so steadfastly that one reporter asked,
"Governor, what do you like most about the national press?"

Mr. Clinton walked on.

Limiting Reporters' Access

The Democrats had been having a measure of success in keeping the campaign
focused on the issue of the day until last week, when an article in The Los
Angeles Times revived questions about how much Mr. Clinton knew about the
influence that was exerted on his behalf to keep him out of the war.

With fresh evidence of equivocation on Mr. Clinton's part about what he knew and
when he knew it, reporters began questioning the candidate again. Campaign
strategists decided to try to limit reporters' access to Mr. Clinton after Susan
Feeney, a reporter for The Dallas Morning News, approached Mr. Clinton in
Independence, Mo., last weekend to ask Mr. Clinton if there was anything else he
wanted to add to his account about the draft to make it more complete.

Mr. Clinton exploded. He accused reporters of taking part in a "feeding frenzy"
on an unimportant subject while allowing Mr. Bush to escape scrutiny about his
role in the Iran-contra arms-for-hostages affair.

Ms. Myers said that Mr. Clinton had answered "thousands" of questions about his
credibility this year and that the President had not been held to a similar
standard.

'They Control Their Message'

"My point is they could be accessible if they wanted to be," Ms. Myers said of
the Bush political operation. "They choose not to be. They control their
message. We're choosing to talk about George Bush's economic plan today in the
setting we choose."

So today when Mr. Clinton chose to respond to Mr. Bush's speech on the economy,
the reporters who cover the Clinton campaign were reduced to crouching around a
speaker phone at the campaign headquarters here, listening to an audio feed of
the Governor's conversations with three Detroit television news anchors. Mr.
Clinton was at the Governor's mansion about a mile away.

The Detroit reporters asked Mr. Clinton about private school vouchers, free
trade, automobile mileage standards and Mr. Bush's speech. But no one asked him
about the draft. Campaign officials say this is proof that the public does not
care about his handling of the issue.

But Some Clinton supporters feel otherwise. Hank Owen, a 58-year-old vice
president for marketing at a Connecticut industrial equipment company, drove to
a Clinton rally in East Haven, Conn., earlier this week. He volunteered to a
reporter that he planned to vote for Mr. Clinton because he does not like Mr.
Bush.

But he did not rush to shake the Governor's hand either. "If he'd come out and
said, 'Yeah, me and seven million other American youths didn't want to go to
Vietnam,' it would have been O.K.," said Mr. Owen, who worries that Mr.
Clinton's explanation of his marijuana use in college was also unnecessarily
evasive. "This thing about inhaling or 'I didn't break the laws of my country.'
Come on, I'm smarter than that."


LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton giving a television interview yesterday from
his mansion in Little Rock, Ark., in an effort to control the campaign coverage.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

7 Charged in Death of Student Who Objected to Racial Slur

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 5; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 302 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., Sept. 10


Seven young men have been charged by Broward County prosecutors in the beating
death last month of a 19-year-old pre-medical student after he objected to a
racial slur.

The prosecutors also said today that they had decided there was not enough
evidence to charge two other men arrested in the killing.

Luyen Phan Nguyen, who immigrated to the United States with his family from
Vietnam as a child, was beaten by about 15 white men on Aug. 15 outside an
apartment complex in the affluent bedroom community of Coral Springs, about 20
miles northwest of Fort Lauderdale, the authorities said. He died of a kick to
the neck, the medical examiner said.

Mr. Nguyen and the other men had been at a party in the complex when someone
used a racial slur related to his Vietnamese ancestry, the police said. Mr.
Nguyen protested and left, but the others followed and attacked him outside, the
police said.

Mr. Nguyen would have been a sophomore at the University of Miami this school
year.

After the beating, rights groups issued pleas for tolerance, saying they feared
the incident might be an indication that bias was on the rise here.

The authorities said charges had not been brought against John Liptak and
Michael Primato, both 18. Mr. Primato, originally of nearby Tamarac, is a
private in the Marine Corps and was on leave from Camp Lejeune, N.C., at the
time of the attack. He was released from the Broward County Jail on Wednesday.
Mr. Liptak, of neighboring Margate, had been free on $25,000 bail.

The prosecutors said second-degree murder charges had been brought against Brad
Mills, 19, Derek Kozma, 19, Christopher Madalone, 19, and his brother, William
Madalone Jr., 22, all of Tamarac, and Michael Jamerson, 20, Christopher
Anderson, 18, and Michael Barychko, 19, all of Coral Springs.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Big Guns Take Sides in Trade-Policy Debate

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 34; Column 3; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1130 words


Chances are that if Warren Steibel, the producer of "Firing Line," were
entrusted with organizing the Presidential debates, they would turn out to be a
lot more enlightening and entertaining than they promise to be this year.
Tonight's two-hour debate on a subject that is not often honored in prime time
manages to make the pros and cons of free trade, believe it or not, positively
lively.

The program was taped last week at the University of Mississippi, where eight
men with some knowledge of the matter gathered to argue over the proposition
that "United States Industry Does Not Need Protection." ("Firing Line" does not
go in for proportionate representation by sex, race or ethnic heritage, but
there is plenty of variety in style as well as of opinion on display.)

Taking the positive side of the negative resolution are William F. Buckley Jr.,
the program's resident polysyllabicist; Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary
of State; Jack Kemp, the present Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and
Representative Dick Armey, Republican of Texas. In favor of some degree of
protection are Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, who is
also the House majority leader; the economist Lester Thurow, dean of the Sloan
School of Management at Massachusetts Institute of Technology; James Fallows,
Washington editor of The Atlantic Monthly, and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.
of California. Michael Kinsley moderates with an occasional wisecrack and a
minimum of interference.

Mr. Kinsley's main jobs are to keep these opinionators to their allotted time
limits, and to make sure that the questions they ask of one another are not
speeches in disguise and the answers do not become what Mr. Buckley calls
anfractuosities. The format of brief statements followed by pointed exchanges
allows the debaters to mix it up, and only now and then to mix up the audience.

Illuminating differences appear within the teams, and significant agreements
across them. Mr. Kissinger turns out to be no strict free-trader; taking a
geopolitical rather than an economic perspective, he supports the recent trade
agreement with Mexico on the grounds that it will help that country achieve full
democracy. Mr. Brown opposes such agreements largely because he sees them as
undermining American sovereignty by giving power to countries like Mexico and to
shadowy international bureaucracies.

But the focus, of course, is on America's economic troubles. No one comes out
against growth, but while Mr. Buckley and Mr. Kemp stand unapologetically for
the blessings of Reaganomics, Mr. Gephardt argues that the United States cannot
afford to play by the rules of free trade as long as other countries -- he cites
Japan -- rig the market. Mr. Armey, who relies mainly on slogans about free
enterprise, is trounced by the facts marshaled by Mr. Fallows and Mr. Thurow,
which is the way debates are supposed to work.

Whichever position you find more congenial, for these two hours you may be
impressed that it is mainly on Government-subsidized public television that you
are likely to find free trade in ideas.

'20/20'

'Soldiers of Misfortune'
 ABC, tonight at 10.
 (Channel 7 in New York.)

Tonight's edition of "20/20" begins with a suggestive report that thousands of
American servicemen wound up as prisoners in the Soviet Union after World War
II. It is largely based on a recent book by James D. Sanders, Mark A. Sauter and
R. Court Kirkwood titled "Soldiers of Misfortune" (National Press). The writers
make a case that the troops were in German P.O.W. camps liberated by the
Russians, who then kept them as hostages for Russian soldiers held by the United
States. When exchange agreements broke down, the authors contend, the Americans
were sent to Siberian labor camps, and Washington ignored their existence for
diplomatic reasons.

Unfortunately, in an apparent effort to bolster an intriguing but problematic
account, the ABC correspondent Tom Jarriel passes along shreds of suspicion,
speculation and the wishful beliefs of relatives of other missing Americans,
some from the wars in Korea and Vietnam. In the rapid shifts, the viewer may
find it difficult to sort out fact from supposition. Let's hope that "20/20" is
not getting into the bad habit, not unknown on the tube, of hyping the facts in
the interests of a more sensational show.

'It Happened on Main Street'
 NBC, Sunday at 8 A.M.
 (Channel 4 in New York.)

Anyone who has been following the savings-and-loan debacle will find no
revelations in this somewhat belated 90-minute edition of "Today," but it does
offer examples of the sort of greed, chicanery, political string-pulling and
official negligence that are costing taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars.

The program notes, for example, that deregulation of the savings-and-loan
industry brought a high time for operators like William Michael Adkinson, who
obtained millions from savings-and-loan branches in Pennsylvania and Texas for a
Florida development called Emerald Coast, which never developed. Since the
lenders knew the Government would cover any losses, however imprudent the loan,
they had no reason to be prudent. A visit to Emerald Coast finds only acres of
sand dunes.

Another operator, David L. Paul, who once controlled the biggest
savings-and-loan chain in Florida, has been charged with diverting $3 million to
his own use, and there are intimations that Washington officials interceded to
keep the heat off him.

After pointing out that the Senators and Representatives who voted for
deregulation in the Reagan years, in effect, encouraged the con artists to cash
in, Garrick Utley notes that the savings-and-loan industry contributed more than
$11 million to Congressional campaigns in the 1980's. The money went especially
to members of the Senate and House banking committees, like Senator Donald W.
Riegle Jr., the Michigan Democrat who is the Senate committee's chairman, and
other members, including the Democratic Senator Alan Cranston of California and
the Republican Senators Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, Phil Gramm of Texas and
Jake Garn of Utah. In some endeavors, a bipartisan spirit prevails.

Firing Line Debate
Resolved: United States Industry Does Not Need Protection
PBS, tonight at 9.
(Channel 13 in New York.)

Produced and directed by Warren Steibel; Jim McQuinn, executive in charge of
production; Mr. McQuinn, Muriel O. Murphy, George Kahookele, associate
producers; Mr, Kahookele, assistant director; Chip Sego, technical director.
Panelists: William F. Buckley Jr., Jack Kemp, Henry A. Kissinger, Representative
Dick Armey, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Lester Thurow, James Fallows,
and Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. Michael Kinsley, moderator.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William F. Buckley Jr., debating the proposition that "United
States Industry Does Not Need Protection," tonight on "Firing Line."

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Loop The Loop

BYLINE: ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 35; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


When Bill Clinton snapped at reporters this week that instead of going on and on
about his Vietnam draft status they should press George Bush about his role in
the Iran-contra affair, Clinton supporters should have been uneasy. It is not a
good sign when a candidate starts attacking the press.

But on Iran-contra, Governor Clinton had a point. We in the press have been
dismally negligent in failing to pin Mr. Bush down on what he knew and did --
negligent for the last six years.

Mr. Bush's consistent position has been that he was uninformed and uninvolved as
Vice President when the decisions were made in 1985 and 1986 to trade arms to
Iran for American hostages. He said he was not aware then that Secretary of
State George Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger were opposed to
the plan.

He was "not in the loop," Mr. Bush told David Broder of The Washington Post in
August 1987. He said:

"If I had sat there and heard George Shultz and Cap [Weinberger] express it
[opposition] strongly, maybe I would have had a stronger view. But when you
don't know something, it's hard to react."

In a television interview in December 1987, the then Vice President put it even
more flatly: "If I had a lot more knowledge of what was going on, I would have
said, 'Don't do this.' "

But in fact Mr. Bush was not uninformed. He did sit there and hear Mr. Shultz
and Mr. Weinberger express their strong opposition. Or so many official sources
say.

A crucial meeting with President Reagan on the Iran arms sales took place on
Jan. 7, 1986. A State Department chronology presented to the Congressional
Iran-contra hearings said:

"Jan. 7, 1986. Meeting at the White House among President, Vice President,
Weinberger, [Attorney General Edwin] Meese, [C.I.A. Director William] Casey,
[White House staff chief Donald] Regan, [national security aide John] Poindexter
and Shultz. Shultz and Weinberger argue strongly against the Iran proposal, but
everyone else favors going forward."

Secretary Shultz testified that at that Jan. 7 meeting "I expressed myself as
forcefully as I could. That is, I didn't just sort of rattle these arguments
off. I was intense." But at the end, he said, "It was clear to me . . . that the
President, the Vice President" and others still favored the operation.

Inside the White House at the time, Mr. Bush was described as not only knowing
about the Iran deal but advocating it. In a computer note on Feb. 1, 1986, Mr.
Poindexter told a colleague: "Most importantly President and Vice President are
solid in taking the position that we have to try."

Two weeks ago we learned of a note dictated by Secretary Shultz the day after
the 1987 Broder interview with Vice President Bush. It said: "VP in papers
yesterday said he was not exposed to Cap or my arguments on Iran arms. Cap
called me [and said] that's terrible. He was on the other side. It's on the
record. Why did he say that."

The newly published note raised fresh questions about Mr. Bush and Iran-contra.
But we did not need the note to doubt Mr. Bush's truthfulness. His claim that he
was "not in the loop" has long since lost any shred of credibility with those
who know the record.

The real question is why the press has been so reluctant to challenge Mr. Bush's
story. I think one reason is fear.

In 1988, when Mr. Bush was running for President, Dan Rather of CBS tried to pin
him down on what he did in Iran-contra. Mr. Bush blustered, said it was old
stuff, accused Mr. Rather of unfairness. Even before the interview ended, Bush
telephone banks made complaining calls to CBS-affiliated stations.

It was a carefully prepared gambit, and it worked. Through the rest of the 1988
campaign reporters hardly raised the Iran question. It is still working.
President Bush brushes off questions on the subject as dated, unfair, silly. He
makes the press feel uncomfortable for asking.

But this was the worst government scandal in years, a crude violation of the
Constitution that damaged the national interest. It matters whether Mr. Bush is
telling the truth about his part in it.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Surf's Up at China Beach

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 9; Page 5; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 362 words


TWO decades after the Marines left China Beach in Vietnam, Americans will surf
again at the spot that was a popular recreational area during the war.

China Beach became well known to the public because of an ABC television series
and a scene in the movie "Apocalypse Now," which showed a soldier surfing as a
village was strafed behind him.

In December, the beach is to be the site of an international surfing tournament.
Vietnamese officials have invited members of the surfing team at San Clemente
(Calif.) High School to represent the United States.

"The Vietnamese are waiting for us to come," said Bruce Hopping of Laguna Beach,
Calif., a patron of the International Surfing Association. He and a delegation
of surfers from Orange County, Calif., visited Vietnam in August, scouting
tournament sites. Mr. Hopping runs the Kalos Kagathos Foundation, a Laguna Beach
organization that will sponsor the tournament. The foundation will also pay for
the 12-member American team to go to Vietnam Dec. 14 to 31.

Mr. Hopping said that after looking over various locations, the surfers and
their Vietnamese hosts chose China Beach, which is on the South China Sea.

"China Beach was the R.& R. center in Danang, the place to go after you were
shot down," recalled Dave Ferrier, a former Army helicopter gunner who lives in
Orange County. "It was the place to kick back with a beer; an attempt to create
a little bit of Honolulu in Vietnam, only with barbed wire."

Mr. Hopping said the waves were only a couple of feet high during his visit last
month. But typhoon season, which begins in September and runs through December,
should raise them to about 15 feet, he said.

Josh Vesque, 16 years old, a junior at San Clemente High School, said his
Vietnamese hosts were interested in learning to surf, rather than talking about
the war. "The kids really enjoyed getting up on the board," he added.

The China Beach tournament will feature amateur teams from Japan, Reunion (an
island near Madagascar), South Africa, Indonesia and the United States, Mr.
Hopping said. If it's a success, the Association of Surfing Professionals could
add Vietnam to the 1993 pro tour.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: China Beach, where a scene in "Apocalypse Now," above, was
filmed. (United Artists)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
The Peace Dividend's Collateral Damage

BYLINE: By PETER PASSELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


IT MAY be victory. But the thrill of winning the cold war is all too quickly
giving way to the agony of defense industries. While Washington is shrinking the
great war machine that deterred Soviet expansion, hardly anyone wants to talk
about how at least one million soldiers, sailors, bomb-builders, submarine
designers, welders and other workers will be redeployed in the civilian economy.

Judged solely by the numbers, the military build-down ought to be easy.
"Compared to the big conversions after World War II, Korea and Vietnam," said
Robert Reischauer, the director of the Congressional Budget Office, "this one is
small potatoes."

But the numbers do not tell the whole story. For unlike previous conversion
efforts, this one is taking place in the teeth of a long, puzzlingly intense
recession that has put new business ventures on hold and frightened corporate
boardrooms into a frenzy of cost-cutting.

Equally problematic, the conversion comes at a time of deep division about the
role of Government in buffering economic shocks. Conservatives argue that
Washington's part in the transition should be minimal, while some of Bill
Clinton's advisers want to seize the day to revivify the country's decaying
infrastructure.

And if the Bush Administration has a plan, it was not to be found in the
economic broadside the President delivered Thursday in Detroit. "There's not
been any overarching strategy" to guide the transition, argues Paul Taibl, the
research director of the Washington-based Defense Budget Project.

Congress's Office of Technology Assessment estimates that the Bush
Administration's proposals would cut military spending by $52 billion annually
by 1995 and cost more than a million jobs. And it speculates that the more
radical surgery suggested by Brookings Institution economists, who are likely to
be influential in a Clinton Administration, would pare spending by at least
twice that much, eliminating 2.4 million jobs by the year 2001.

Absorbing the Workers

But William Niskanen, a former adviser to President Reagan who is now chairman
of the libertarian Cato Institute in Washington, offers a soothing perspective.
Demobilization after World War II, he notes, slashed employment by 10 million in
just two years and dumped the job seekers into a labor market half the current
size. While the conversions after Korea and Vietnam were smaller, they were
still large and abrupt compared to the deepest cuts contemplated today.

Government did little to smooth these postwar transitions, Mr. Niskanen notes.
Yet workers were, for the most part, speedily reabsorbed. Of course, the impact
is never evenly felt. More than 10 percent of the labor force in Alaska, Hawaii
and Virginia is in military-related work. And the military or its contractors
are the dominant employers in dozens of places from Bath, Me., to Monterey,
Calif.

But here, too, the number-crunchers are inclined to be sanguine. Such company
towns, they say, are the exceptions, not the rule.

The impact on industry is a somewhat different story. Military procurement
represents 20 percent or more of the business of a dozen industries ranging from
shipbuilding to ammunition to communications equipment. Some contractors, like
Boeing and General Electric, could certainly thrive despite smaller Government
orders. Others, notably shipbuilders, will be at great risk.

But in the eyes of many economists -- and most politicians -- stockholders
deserve no special breaks. The damage to worry about is that done to employees,
their families and their communities. A good transition policy has to deal with
these human costs and also find productive work for the engineering elite.

Why, then, has the challenge of redeploying resources so long devoted to
stopping Communism in its tracks been as welcome in Congress as a ban on free
postage? And why has candidate Bush been so keen on flogging exports of fighter
aircraft and proposing the reconstruction of the obsolete Air Force Base in
Homestead, Fla., rather than explaining how he would invest the peace dividend?

An obvious answer is that the people are scared to death of the transition. With
the economy expanding so slowly, a job lost today could mean no job at all for a
very long time.

History suggests that local economic shocks -- in this case, base and plant
closings -- dissipate quickly. Lawrence Katz of Harvard and Olivier Blanchard of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology estimate that, on average, regional
differences in unemployment have been eliminated within five years. But history
is modest comfort to people who have lost faith in the prevailing conservative
doctrine that the best policy for industrial transition is as little policy as
possible. And the widely held conviction that the Bush Administration has no
ideological compass to navigate the economic fog has helped create an audience
for other voices.

One of those voices belongs to Ira Magaziner, a Rhode Island business consultant
who drafted the military conversion proposals in the Clinton campaign's economic
program. He sees opportunity in adversity, a way to direct the peace dividend
toward investment in "21st century infrastructure" -- everything from high speed
trains to broad-band digital communications. He calls for investing $20 billion
annually on Federally subsidized partnerships with local governments or private
corporations to match redundant manufacturing facilities and military workers to
specific projects.

Pragmatic economists generally shied away from such hands-on "industrial
policy." Most never bought into the idea that New Deal meddling with private
markets helped end the Depression. And many were shaken by the Carter
Administration's abortive "synfuels" effort to subsidize alternatives to
imported oil. But the sense that the old rules of thumb are no longer of much
value is pushing some toward interventionism.

Robert Solow, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, fears
that the highly skilled engineers in military research will not easily find
productive work in the civilian economy. And while he affirms that "the
Government's primary responsibility is general prosperity," he is tempted by the
idea of creating a civilian technology agency that would subsidize private
ventures in critical fields.

Mr. Reischauer has a parallel "feeling that specializations are not easily
transferable." The craftsmen who weld steel to the hulls of nuclear cruisers are
not about to get similar jobs in a commercial shipbuilding industry that no
longer exists.

It is unclear whether this stew of ideas will influence the Bush Administration.
Its sole transition proposal is a few hundred million dollars a year for
retraining -- a program so modest that John Tepper Marlin of the liberal Council
on Economic Priorities suspects there is method to the President's muddle: "He
wants the threat of job loss to keep workers and the Congress behind . . . his
levels of defense spending."

Proposals to spend about $1 billion annually on a mix of retraining, community
assistance and aid for defense contractors are inching their way through both
the House and Senate. But even if a program does pass the legislative gantlet,
Mr. Taibl sees no coherent strategy that will make a real difference in the
transition.

The ironies are dispiriting. The end of the cold war is widely seen as the
triumph of capitalism. But how to make use of the economic fruit of that
victory, the peace dividend, has become a test of the system's vaunted
resilience -- a test that many fear it may not pass.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Gauging the Pain Of Military Retrenchment" shows military
spending, personal, civilian employees and industry employment from '40 to '90;
States that will be hardest hit by military job cutbacks (Source: Congressional
Office of Technology Assesment; Defense Department; Office of Management and
Budget)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 13, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SKIPPING AHEAD;
On the Economy, Bush Tries to Keep Focus on the Future

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words


"THE ECONOMY, STUPID."

That sign on the wall of Bill Clinton's headquarters in Little Rock is a
reminder to the campaign staff. Stick to the basics. Avoid diversions.

The economic slump of the last four years is George Bush's chief weakness and
Mr. Clinton's greatest strength. Few people doubt that if the election turns on
that issue, the Governor of Arkansas will be the next President of the United
States. The most recent New York Times/CBS News Poll, in late August, found that
77 percent of registered voters disapproved of the way Mr. Bush had dealt with
the economy, compared with only 17 percent who approved.

So everywhere he goes nowadays, Mr. Clinton fans the flames, reminding voters
that economic growth under President Bush has been slower than in any other
Presidential term since World War II, and that more businesses have failed and
fewer jobs have been created. He talks about how incomes have dropped while
unemployment has risen, how American wages are lower than those in a dozen other
countries and how the gap between the rich and the poor has widened
significantly.

"Labor has been devalued for a dozen years," Mr. Clinton said in Cromwell,
Conn., last week in a typical stump speech. "We have stayed too long with
trickle-down economics, and we have paid a terrible price for it."

For a time, the Bush camp believed that the best strategy was to change the
subject, to try to get the public to focus on other issues like foreign policy
and family values and crime. But when James A. Baker 3d took over the Bush
campaign after the Republican National Convention last month, he decided the
President had to confront the economic issue head-on. Mr. Baker just tried to
make a subtle change in the lens. Instead of focusing on the state of the
economy now or in the last four years, Mr. Baker would like voters to
concentrate on what the economy should be in the next four years and even in the
next century. He wants them to see Mr. Bush as reliable and trustworthy, Mr.
Clinton as rash and irresponsible.

That was what the President's speech on Thursday to the Detroit Economic Club
was about. He broke little new substantive ground. But for the first time in his
Presidency -- more than three and a half years after he took office, 26 months
after the recession began and just 53 days before the election -- Mr. Bush cast
his views on the economy in terms of themes and principles, hopes and dreams,
instead of random legislative proposals.

First he talked about why the economy had gone sour. It was caused, he said, by
"profound changes now at work in our economy," listing items like layoffs in the
defense industry, the staggering debts accumulated by companies and households
in the 1980's and the shaky banking system.

Then he talked about his desire "to keep tax rates low and make them lower, to
keep money sound, to limit government spending and regulations and to open the
way for greater competition and freer trade."

And he spoke of "the mirage that my opponent offers of a government that
accumulates capital by taxing it and borrowing it from the people and then
redistributing it according to some industrial policy."

Only time will tell whether Mr. Bush can succeed in getting voters to compare
the candidates' economic visions rather than to think just about his economic
record. Over the years, incumbent Presidents have generally been judged on their
records. In the last half century, the only Presidential election years when the
economy was as bad as it is now were 1960 and 1980, and both times the incumbent
party was voted out of office.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton have hedged on what is perhaps the central economic
question facing the next President: how to reduce the enormous budget deficit.
That would almost certainly require raising most people's taxes or cutting
popular government programs, stands no candidate wants to take.

But if voters do look at the future, the choices will be clear. The two
candidates this year have strikingly different views of how the economy should
be handled in the years ahead.

Mr. Bush wants the Government basically to leave the free market alone. Mr.
Clinton believes the Government should take an active role in directing the
nation's economy.

Mr. Bush believes wealthy Americans are taxed too much. Mr. Clinton would raise
their taxes.

Mr. Bush would cut social programs and public works to the bone. Mr. Clinton
would expand Government spending in many areas and would invest in capital
projects like roads and bridges, transportation systems and communications
networks.

Mr. Bush would loosen and abolish Government rules and restraints on businesses.
Mr. Clinton wants new regulations on business to protect the environment and to
force energy conservation.

Mr. Bush's ideas about medical care and job training are based on tax
incentives. Mr. Clinton would require employers to provide medical insurance and
training to their employees or pay money to the Government to do the job for
them.

Mr. Bush favors free trade at almost all costs. Mr. Clinton is increasingly
taking the view that the United States should be tougher on its trading
partners.

Rightly or wrongly, the Bush camp believes that if voters examine those
differences, they will come down on the President's side. "We're trying to focus
on some of the key differences that separate us from Bill Clinton," a senior
Administration official said in Detroit just before Mr. Bush's speech Thursday.
"Goals are important in terms of giving a country a sense of direction."

It is in this context that the Bush camp keeps raising anew the question of Mr.
Clinton's draft record. It is not so much that Mr. Clinton did not fight in
Vietnam. Neither did Vice President Dan Quayle, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney,
Senator Phil Gramm and countless others of the Bush stripe who are near Mr.
Clinton's age. Rather, the Bush team seeks to exploit Mr. Clinton's shifting
explanations of what he did to avoid the draft. They are trying to plant the
seed that he cannot be trusted, on this, on the economy or on anything else.

At the behest of the Bush campaign, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, put
a long document in the Congressional Record last week listing Mr. Clinton's
various statements on the draft issue. "The campaign," Mr. Dole told the Senate,
"boils down to a few critical words: trust, confidence and credibility -- which
candidate can you trust, which candidate will earn your confidence and which
candidate has the kind of credibility to be President of the United States?"

Why Now, at Long Last?

But Mr. Bush is caught in something of a box. Like it or not, he has been
President for the last four years. And every time he says what he wants to do in
his next term, it raises the question: Why is he just now getting around to
doing something?

If he really believes in trimming back government, why has Federal spending
risen in the last four years, from 22 percent to 24 percent of economic output?

If he so despises Government regulations, why did he promote laws like the Clean
Air Act and the Americans With Disabilities Act, both of which place large
burdens on businesses?

And most of all, if he favors cutting taxes, why did he break his no-new-taxes
pledge and sign a $137 billion tax increase two years ago, one of the largest
tax increases in history?

The tax question has bedeviled him more than the others. Campaigning in New
Jersey on Wednesday, Mr. Bush declared, "I went along with one Democratic tax
increase, and I'm not going to do it again -- ever, ever!"

The next day, the President's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, took it back. "We're
not going to make pledges beyond our pledge to cut taxes across the board," Mr.
Fitzwater said.

And which particular taxes might be cut? The White House would not say, further
raising the stakes about credibility.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words



Democratic Gains in Thailand

Official election results gave a slim majority for four anti-military parties,
whose leaders hope to form a coalition, but military parties still hold a large
bloc. Page A3.

Sad Exodus from Vietnam

Freed after years in prison, officials of the former South Vietnam are coming to
America. Many are broken in health and spirit. Page A10.

Trade Tensions With China


The war of words between China and the United States appears likely to intensify
this week during trade talks in Beijing. Page D1.

More Problems for CBS

Some local television stations that are affiliates of the CBS network are
refusing to carry certain programs, including the morning news. Page D1.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Anxious in His Lead, Clinton Fights to Run Race His Way

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Sept. 13


Part of the ritual of Presidential campaigns is the ceremonial boarding and
unboarding of the plane, with the candidate walking past a gantlet of reporters
shouting questions on the issues of the day. A relaxed candidate will stop and
take a few. Gov. Bill Clinton strides right on by these days.

One week after Labor Day, with only seven weeks to go until the election, this
is a tense and careful campaign. Mr. Clinton has retained his lead in the polls,
even enlarged it in the Newsweek survey released Saturday. But every day is a
struggle to keep the election focused where he wants it focused: on the ailing
economy and on President Bush's shortcomings, rather than on the character
issues that the Bush campaign wants front and center, notably Mr. Clinton's
shifting accounts of his draft record.

Formidable Hurdles Remain


His aides call it staying "on message": a manufacturing-jobs program last
Tuesday, welfare reform on Wednesday, values on Friday, more jobs proposals this
week. "What people want is fairly basic," said Stan Greenberg, the polltaker for
the Clinton campaign. "They know they don't want Bush, and they want to know
where Bill Clinton wants to take the country, and that's what we're laying out.
It's a meat-and-potatoes election."

The economy played a big role in the results of the Newsweek poll, which showed
Mr. Clinton running 15 points ahead of the President, 53 percent to 38 percent.
Seventy percent of those surveyed disapproved of the way Mr. Bush was handling
the economy; 47 percent thought Mr. Clinton would handle it better. The poll had
a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.

But while the race may seem stable in the polls now, Clinton aides say that much
of the campaign's future is outside their control. The real television
advertising has yet to begin. The draft issue continues to percolate, despite
Mr. Clinton's attempts to cast it as settled. And the debates, assuming the Bush
campaign ultimately agrees to a schedule, are almost certain to have an enormous
impact. Mr. Clinton spent much of the past week preparing for them, and aides
say he will be in East Lansing, Mich., on Sept. 22, the date set for the first
debate by the Commission on Presidential Debates, regardless of where Mr. Bush
is.

It is a stage of the election where the risks and the rewards are great for a
challenger like Mr. Clinton. He told a crowd on Saturday night that he sometimes
felt bewildered by how far his campaign has come, a standard political gesture
of humility but one with some credibility, given Mr. Clinton's experience with
near political death in the primaries. The atmospherics on the trail these days
underscore the stakes: the heckling is tougher, the cheers more impassioned.

A group of Bush-Quayle supporters, fresh-faced young people who said they were
from local colleges, greeted Mr. Clinton at an event in a leafy suburb in
Virginia on Saturday night. "Hey, hey, ho, ho, draft dodgers got to go!" they
chanted as his car rolled past the placards asserting, "Clinton You're No
Patriot." They also chanted the distillation of another line of Republican
attack: "Failed Governor, Small State!"

At his speech on values at Notre Dame on Friday, Mr. Clinton was interrupted by
the shouts of a handful of anti-abortion demonstrators almost every time he
talked about the needs of children: "What about the babies, Bill?" they yelled.
"What about the babies?"

But Mr. Clinton's supporters seem equally intense, energized, it seems, by the
Republican convention and its numerous attacks on the nominee and his wife,
Hillary. At the University of Notre Dame on Friday, the hall erupted in
sustained cheers when Mrs. Clinton was introduced, a kind of determined assault
on the scattered boos in the room; afterwards, many young women pushed to the
front of the crowd, trying to get a close-up look at her, shouting, "Hillary!
Over here, Hillary!"

His aides say he is trying to step up to the moment, to articulate a vision, to
be big enough, in other words, for the voters to see him as something more than
not Bush. Clinton aides bristle at the rumble of criticism in recent days from
pundits and politicians that Mr. Clinton is sitting on his lead, being too
cautious, not risking or reaching or working enough. "The object is to win, not
to kill him," snapped Paul Begala, a Clinton aide, on the campaign plane the
other day.

Detente on Issues Criticized

But Mr. Clinton, in the way he handles many issues, often feeds the criticism
that he is excessively cautious and too political, or, in the words of Mr. Bush,
"waffling" in a way that is unacceptable in a President. This is sometimes
applied to his position on the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mr.
Clinton says he supports in principle but is withholding final judgment on until
he reads the fine print.

It is sometimes applied to his solicitous courtship of a wide range of
constituents. On Saturday, for example, he attended a rally on the Washington
Mall with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, which was intended to honor black families and
kick off a voter registration drive; a crab feast in the Virginia suburbs, and,
finally, a fund raiser at the Middleburg, Va., estate of Pamela Harriman, deep
in horse country.

But the campaign seems more sensitive to the charge of excessive politics when
it is applied to Mr. Clinton's account of how he managed to avoid the draft in
the Vietnam War, which his Republican critics assert has changed several times
depending on the audience and the time frame.

The Governor blew up at reporters who asked about it last Monday; since then,
his aides have calmly stated that he has talked about it quite enough. Publicly,
they dismiss the notion that the Republican emphasis on this issue in recent
days has them worried

"I think whatever people think about Bill Clinton and the draft, they've already
made up their mind," said Mickey Kantor, the chairman of the Clinton campaign.
"There doesn't appear to be any movement one way or the other, based on the
recent Bush-Quayle discussion of it."

Focus on the Economy

Still, a campaign that watched its lead disappear in New Hampshire, when charges
that he had manipulated his draft status first broke, can hardly stay sanguine
about it today.

Mr. Clinton, campaigning this weekend, kept his focus on the economy, on a
mocking assault on President Bush's economic proposals and on what he asserted
was a dark Republican plot to win the election by dividing the nation. Saturday
night, in the backyard of a home in Falls Church, Va., he cut loose, ridiculing
Mr. Bush as a man who promises to "never, ever" raise taxes again, then sends
his press secretary out to declare "that was not a pledge."

He compared Mr. Bush to the sinner who contends, "the devil made me do it," when
he blames Congress for forcing him into the 1990 budget agreement that included
tax increases. "They made me do it," he said, his voice edging into a whine.
"What do you expect? I'm just the President."

Then he segued, reaching for a larger appeal: "It's our responsibility to bring
the reality back into this campaign, and to bring the hope back into this
campaign, and to keep people's visions on the future. We are better than this.
We are better than this. And we can do better than this. The only way we will
not prevail is if one more time we become divided or distracted, if one more
time we allow fear to dominate hope."

In Falls Church, and at every event n recent days, he talked of the number of
days remaining, just over 50 now. But he did so almost grimly, warily, like a
man who sees a finish line, but one so distant it gives little solace.


LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton preparing for an early morning run yesterday
in downtown Little Rock, Ark. He has retained his lead in the polls, and even
enlarged it in the Newsweek survey released this weekend. (Associated Press)
(pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S., Mindful of Setbacks in Past, Offers Guarded Praise of Capture

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD R. KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


Long frustrated in its efforts to develop an effective policy toward Peru, the
Bush Administration responded today to the capture of the rebel leader Abimael
Guzman Reynoso with a mixture of satisfaction and caution.

Some officials compared the arrest of the Shining Path leader with the capture
of Che Guevara, the Marxist revolutionary who was tracked down and executed in
Bolivia in 1967. They expressed hope that Mr. Guzman's capture would turn the
tide in the losing war against the Peruvian rebels and the drug traffickers who
finance them.

But Administration officials also noted that Shining Path has shown enormous
resiliency in recent years and has repeatedly spirited its members out of
prisons. Also tempering the urge to celebrate was the mixed outcome of the
Administration's fitful efforts to help fight Shining Path while pressing
President Alberto K. Fujimori to reverse his seizure of near-dictatorial powers
and improve his human rights record.

Rebels' Link to Drug Traffic

In suspending the Constitution on April 5, Mr. Fujimori said he needed
untrammeled authority to fight the rebels and drug traffickers. Shining Path's
base of operations in the Upper Huallaga Valley is the richest area of coca
cultivation in the world, and the group taxes and protects growers and
cooperates with traffickers to finance its operations.

Peru supplies the raw material for more than half the cocaine consumed in the
United States. In recent months, the Administration's concern about Shining Path
has deepened with reports that its operations are spreading into neighboring
Bolivia.

"These people direct the most violent and vicious terrorist group that has ever
existed in Latin America," the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, Bernard W. Aronson, said today.

He predicted that the arrests would "provide the Peruvian Government and people
with what they need most in this battle: some sense of hope and confidence."

Mr. Aronson said it was too early to tell whether the capture would help restore
a sense of legitimacy to the Peruvian Government or help mend relations between
Lima and Washington, which have been strained since Mr. Fujimori dissolved the
legislature, the courts and the Constitution.

But the Assistant Secretary of State hinted that a better relationship had been
in the making since Mr. Fujimori pledged to hold new legislative elections in
November and to allow observers of the Organization of American States to
monitor the polling.

United States officials refused to say whether American intelligence or military
personnel were in any way involved in the events that led to Mr. Guzman's
arrest.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, chairman of the House Subcommittee on
Western Hemisphere Affairs, said it was "certainly possible" that the United
States had provided some intelligence assistance in the operation, although
military aid to Peru was suspended last spring.

Mr. Torricelli predicted that the capture of Mr. Guzman would help ease tensions
between Lima and Washington. "I say this with great reservation, but this
represents somewhat of a vindication for Fujimori's actions," the New Jersey
Democrat said.

Even before Mr. Fujimori seized emergency powers in April, Congress had held up
Administration efforts to train Peruvian military units in anti-drug operations
and had delayed economic aid aimed at weaning local economies from dependence on
coca growing. Many Democrats warned of an American military entanglement similar
to the one in Vietnam.

Mr. Fujimori's suspension of the Constitution led to the cancellation of $167
million in economic aid and the withdrawal of 20 advisers training Peruvian
police in operations against drug traffickers. Relations deteriorated further
when a Peruvian Air Force jet opened fire on an American transport plane
involved in anti-drug reconnaissance on April 24, causing the death of one
crewman.

The Bush Administration contends that the Peruvian people will only follow a
democratic government in the long run. Today United States officials agreed that
Mr. Fujimori's standing would be bolstered by the capture of the terrorist
leader but said it was unclear what policies he would pursue from a position of
greater strength.

Among the human rights abuses attributed to the Peruvian authorities in recent
years are sporadic mass killings in Indian communities and torture in prisons.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Old Soldiers: The Last Refugees Free to Leave Vietnam

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif.


The men who missed the helicopters fleeing Saigon in 1975 are finally arriving
in the United States -- high-ranking South Vietnamese officers and government
officials who have spent much of their lives since then in Communist prison
camps.

They are the last and saddest wave in a 17-year flood of Vietnamese refugees
that first included their luckier highly placed comrades, then a tide of
desperate boat people, then thousands of the half-Vietnamese children of
American servicemen.

More than 50,000 former prisoners and family members have arrived in the United
States since the start of 1990 under an agreement with the Hanoi Government.
Many of them are broken in health and in spirit and unable to find jobs or to
adjust to their new lives.

The new arrivals are among the final stragglers of the war, the emotional
equivalent for the South Vietnamese of America's missing in action.

"I am a soldier, so if nobody tells me to leave Vietnam it is difficult for me
to leave," said Gen. Tran Quoc Lich, who stood his post and spent 13 years in a
Communist internment camp, arriving here last December, three years after being
freed.

"I wish to work for a living," said General Lich, whose last command was as
Inspector General of Fourth Corps in South Vietnam. "I ask for work, but they
say, 'Sorry, wait,' because there is no place, no job, for me."

100,000 Under the Plan

By the time the waiting lists are exhausted three years from now, United States
officials estimate they will have accepted 100,000 former prisoners and family
members under the new release program.

Already the flood of boat people has shrunk to a trickle, and the program
bringing in the children of American servicemen will be completed soon, helping
to push the Vietnamese population of the United States past one million. No
longer will most of the immigrants be refugees; instead they will simply be
immigrants seeking to join family members.

The profile of the former prisoners is similar to that of the first and most
successful refugees from Vietnam: military officers, government officials,
professional men and women with ties to the United States, said Shep Lowman, a
senior policy analyst with the refugee program of the United States Catholic
Conference.

But now they arrive bearing the burden of passing years and prison hardships, at
a time when there are fewer refugee assistance programs or job opportunities to
sustain them.

Many expected to be welcomed as heroes, and there was a widespread rumor among
them that the United States would provide back pay for their years in prison
camps, said Yen Ngoc Do, editor of the Vietnamese-language daily Nguoi Viet.

"They have come prepared to show the courage of the former soldiers of South
Vietnam," said Mr. Yen, "but they are showing themselves only as a group of
misfit people. Their political and military past has been totally forgotten."

This has led to flashes of friction between the new arrivals here in the
Vietnamese community known as Little Saigon and the now-successful men who left
them behind.

"The high-ranking officers are afraid to face us, because most of them told us
to stay back and fight the Vietcong," said Nguyen Le Kinh, 55 years old, who was
a captain in the South Vietnamese forces and said he had served 6 years 7 months
and 11 days in an internment camp. Like other prisoners, he said he had suffered
humiliation and hardship in his homeland.

"Most of those who fled to the United States told us to be brave, to stay in our
units," he said in careful English. "And at the same time they board the
helicopters or they wait at the airport."

In the years since then, he said, while prisoners like him struggled against
their Communist captors, some of those same officers, safely settled in America,
were already beginning to make business contacts with their old adversaries in
Hanoi.

Reminder of Collapsed Lives

For many residents of Little Saigon, a bustling community of Vietnamese malls
and markets 30 miles south of Los Angeles, the new arrivals bring with them an
unwelcome breath of tragedy, a reminder of the collapsed world they all left
behind.

And many of the new refugees have embraced that sense of tragedy as their new
identity.

Within the emigre Vietnamese world here the former prisoners refer to themselves
as "H-O" refugees, from the bureaucratic designation given to them by the State
Department. Each successive group in the program was dubbed HO1, HO2, HO3, HO4,
and the refugees' new label became for them a symbol of their fate.

"In Vietnamese, ho means alas," said Nguyen Duc, a 55-year-old former army
captain who spends his sleepless nights trying to write a book about his years
in internment.

"I tell my wife often when she is depressed that in English H means hope and O
means opportunity," he said. "But it is really too late for us. We are old. Our
health is broken, especially our mental health."

He said his depression often threatens to overwhelm him. But he struggles to put
it aside, he said, because "if I am too sad I do not have the energy to support
my family. Sadness is a luxury for me now."

One great source of pain for many of the refugees is their estrangement from
family members who came to America while the refugees were still in prison and
who adapted and prospered in their absence.

When the wife of Col. Nguyen Thanh Quan fled to the airport in April 1975 with
their four children, she could see shells exploding on the bridge where her
husband was commanding a contingent of National Police troops.

"I knew he would stay and fight because my husband was a very strong man," said
his wife, Luong Thi Lai.

In seven years in prison, Colonel Quan said : "To speak frankly, I was very
afraid, very afraid at night. I told myself, if I want to see my family again,
the only way is to forget them.  Just do what I have to do and forget them."

While he struggled with his fears and hardships, his wife was building a new
life in California without him. And by the time he rejoined her two years ago,
she was the owner of her own beauty school and their children were in college
studying dentistry, medicine, chiropractic and architecture.

For Colonel Quan, his reunion with his family was almost as traumatic as his
years in an internment camp.  "When he came, it was even difficult to eat
together," his wife said. "We sleep differently, we eat differently, we think
differently, everything is different. In the car, fight. In the school, fight.
In the office, fight."

'He Was Really Mad'

When his children, who now speak only a little Vietnamese, ignored his wishes,
she said: "He was really mad.  He would lie in bed and not move, or go in the
bathroom and shut the door."

When she took him to look for work, she said, "nobody wanted him.

"If you look at somebody and he is not happy, not healthy, not attractive, you
are not going to give him a job."

Colonel Quan agreed. "It's hard for people like me to come here," he said.  "My
mind is sad. I have many worries.  I forget things easily. My mind is not like
the people who came here in 1975."

Unlike many similar couples, Colonel Quan and his wife have stayed together. The
price has been an acceptance of his inferior status. Mr. Yen, the editor, said
that as more and more of the former detainees gathered in Little Saigon over the
years, a debate over the true significance of their H-O designation developed
into an obsessive search to find a meaning in their fate.

"There were at least five theories about it," Mr. Yen said. "But then people
discovered that it is not ho but only H. It is H-zero-one, H-zero-two, for
different groups of refugees and when they get to 10, the 0 disappears."

Undeterred, he said, some people read meaning into the single letter H,
asserting that it stands for humanitarian. "But just now," Mr. Yen said, "we are
hearing from the immigration office in Saigon that the H program came after the
G Program, and the G program came after the F program, and that it is only a
letter in the alphabet."

The final lesson in the refugees' analysis of their H-O designation, he said,
is: "It means nothing."


LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "To speak frankly, I was very afraid, very afraid at night,"
said Col. Nguyen Thanh Quan, right, who spent seven years in a prison camp in
Vietnam. "I told myself, if I want to see my family again, the only way is to
forget them. Just do what I have to do and forget them." With him in Pomona,
Calif., was his wife, Luong Thi Lai, who fled with their four children to the
United States in April 1975. (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Is Harsh, His Backers Harsher

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., Sept. 13


President Bush opened a three-day campaign swing through the Far West today with
a pungent political attack on Gov. Bill Clinton before several thousand backers
at a rally. But here in Orange County, a land more Republican than Pat Nixon's
cloth coat, Mr. Bush's remarks were easily the day's mildest comments.

Indeed, Mr. Bush was nearly upstaged by two earlier speakers, former President
Ronald Reagan and Representative Robert K. Dornan of California. Mr. Reagan drew
a larger crowd, and thunderous cheers, with a speech that disparaged Mr.
Clinton's efforts to avoid military service during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Dornan, a bearded, redheaded and very conservative politician who is well
known for his rhetorical flourishes, threw away the Emily Post guide to
politics. He told the crowd a joke based on past accusations about Mr. Clinton's
marital problems, and alluded to the draft issue by calling the Democrat
"Chicken Little of Little Rock."

When Mr. Clinton was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University during the Vietnam
War, Mr. Dornan went on, he spent his time in a pub, "eating compulsively to the
point of exhaustion," "throwing darts" and "drinking ale" while other men his
age fought and died.

'Free Speech,' a Bush Aide Says

A deputy White House spokeswoman, Judy Smith, said later that Mr. Dornan's
remarks were his own. "What we're trying to do is focus the campaign on issues,"
she said. "He's entitled to his opinion. Free speech."

President Reagan was more deft than Mr. Dornan, but no less cutting, in
suggesting that Orange County's famous Santa Ana winds would prevent Mr. Clinton
from visiting the area anytime soon. "I understand he prefers to steer clear of
drafts," Mr. Reagan said to a swell of laughter.

Although today's event was a Bush-Quayle campaign rally, Mr. Reagan seemed to
boast greater star appeal. At the end of his speech, as Mr. Bush took the
lectern for the day's main event, hundreds of listeners turned and headed for
the exits.

But whether they come from surrogates or from the President himself, comparisons
between Mr. Clinton's lack of a military record and Mr. Bush's record as a Navy
pilot in World War II are clearly the wave of the future in this campaign. There
were even suggestions that Mr. Bush would personally raise the issue during this
trip, perhaps during a proposed speech on Tuesday at a National Guard convention
in Utah.

Mr. Bush's staff is negotiating his appearance at the convention. Asked whether
the President would raise Mr. Clinton's draft record there, the campaign
spokeswoman, Torie Clarke, declined to comment.

Today, in Orange County, Mr. Bush stuck largely to his standard stump speech.
Some recent polls suggest that he has narrowed Mr. Clinton's nationwide lead to
as few as 10 percentage points, from 25 points before the Republican National
Convention. Mr. Bush's strategists are hoping this trip, combined with recent
White House decisions to help out California's depressed military sector, will
narrow that gap still further.

'No Rocket Scientist'

Today, Mr. Bush accused Mr. Clinton of supporting budget cuts that would turn
the military into a force "whose idea of high-tech weaponry is the Super Soaker
water gun."

"He wants to cut it $60 billion beyond what military experts and our civilian
experts tell me is right," Mr. Bush said. "These cuts would cost as many as one
million jobs in defense, especially in California's hard-hit aerospace
industry."

The President also took a poke at a recent speaking lapse by Mr. Clinton, in
which the Democrat confused the Patriot missile -- the air-defense weapon that
downed Iraqi Scud missiles during the Gulf War -- with so-called "smart bombs"
that can be guided by lasers down chimney shafts and through windows.

"Governor Clinton may be a Rhodes scholar," Mr. Bush said. "But he's no rocket
scientist."

The President's California trip begins a tour that will include Washington,
Oregon, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah and will dwell mostly on environmental
issues.


LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan greeting
supporters yesterday at a rally in Yorba Linda, Calif., in Orange County. Mr.
Bush opened a three-day campaign swing through the Far West. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 14, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Pursuing Ends by Any, Or Even Every, Means

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1165 words



Kissinger
A Biography
By Walter Isaacson
Illustrated. 893 pages. Simon & Schuster. $30.

If any generalization can be made about the former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger, it must surely be that he inspired remarkable extremes of admiration
and contempt, often enough in the same individual. As Walter Isaacson, an editor
of Time magazine, puts it in this endlessly fascinating biography of Mr.
Kissinger, "Years after he left office, Kissinger still aroused controversy of a
distinctly personal sort -- hatred and veneration, animosity and awe, all
battling it out with little neutral territory in between."

Partly because his subject is so contradictory -- and partly because he believes
that enough time has now passed to gain sufficient perspective -- Mr. Isaacson
has attempted to steer away from onesidedness and "to produce an unbiased
biography that portrayed Kissinger in all his complexity." Looking over some 30
pages of notes that a reading of "Kissinger" prompted this reviewer to jot down,
I see again and again such words as "secretive," "deceitful," "disingenuous,"
"paranoid," "insecure," "temper-tantrum," "flatterer" and "two-faced," not to
speak of references to a multitude of anecdotes that place Mr. Kissinger in a
negative light. Imagining yourself a casual browser of this book, you have to
wonder if it could have gone any worse for Mr. Kissinger had Mr. Isaacson
striven for onesidedness instead of balance.

Fortunately, there will be few casual browsers of "Kissinger." Its illustrations
of its subject's various modes of operation are so outrageous and entertaining
that you plunge into the narrative and don't come up again until the book is
done. No detail of the drama is recounted that is not somehow related to the
characters of its actors, not even those passages involving strategic arms
negotiations or America's endless struggle to extricate itself from Vietnam.

Whenever the narrative threatens to bog down in trivia, Mr. Isaacson will step
back and offer a summary section on Mr. Kissinger's "courtier's instincts" or
sample a typical period of his "crisis juggling," or find some other
imaginatively offbeat approach to material that has been gone over many times
before. One result is a history that is always scaled to the standard of human
fallibility, to the tics and idiosyncrasies of people heroic in their faults as
well as their strivings. And Mr. Kissinger's own character assumes a roundness
and plausibility unrivaled by that in any previous biography, including Seymour
M. Hersh's "Price of Power."

Yet "Kissinger" is very far from mere gossip. As Mr. Isaacson presents it, his
subject's complexity is all of a piece. He manipulated America's superpower
rivals exactly as he jostled for advantage among those who competed with him for
President Richard M. Nixon's attention. He isolated South Vietnam's President,
Nguyen Van Thieu, from the United States' peace negotiations with North Vietnam
just as he cut off members of his staff at the National Security Council from
people and processes that might have enhanced their standing. In Mr. Isaacson's
view, no diplomatic challenge was too grave or trivial to provoke in Mr.
Kissinger the sort of deceptive double-dealing that would make most people burn
up with shame.

Is Mr. Kissinger a monster then? As this book presents him, his failings are
more evident than his successes, and Mr. Isaacson never pulls any punches in
condemning those shortcomings. He blames Mr. Kissinger for contributing to the
attitude in the Nixon Administration that eventually led to the excesses of
Watergate. He strongly questions whether what was gained in four additional
years of struggling with Vietnam was worth the sacrifice in human lives and
national morale.

He speculates that the United States' secret bombing of Cambodia was an indirect
cause of that country's eventual suffering at the hands of the Khmer Rouge. And
he flat out condemns Mr. Kissinger for failing to seek Jordanian-Israeli
negotiation in the wake of the 1973 war and thus bringing about the Arabs'
designating the Palestine Liberation Organization (instead of Jordan) to bargain
for the West Bank.

But in every case where Mr. Isaacson faults Mr. Kissinger, he eventually steps
back and points out a greater good that was served. In his final summing up, he
writes: "As the only European-style realist ever to guide U.S. foreign policy, a
power practitioner unencumbered by the sentimental idealism that suffuses
American history, he seemed painfully amoral at times. But he was able to take a
clear-eyed approach to the creation of a new global balance, one that helped to
preserve American influence in the post-Vietnam era and eventually contributed
to the end of the cold war."

What remains a little disconcerting is the sense of vertigo you feel at the
limitlessness of Mr. Kissinger's willingness to trim and compromise, at least in
this book's portrayal of him.  There seems to be no bedrock to his moral system.
This is plausibly, even movingly, explained by an eloquent letter he once wrote
explaining the psychology of a concentration camp survivor he had come to know:
"Having once made up one's mind to survive, it was a necessity to follow through
with a singleness of purpose, inconceivable to you sheltered in the States. Such
singleness of purpose broached no stopping in front of accepted sets of values,
it had to disregard ordinary standards of morality.  One could only survive
through lies, tricks and by somehow acquiring food to fill one's belly. The
weak, the old had no chance.

"And so liberation came. The survivors were not within the ordinary pale of
human events anymore."

Given the experience of his childhood in Germany and the loss of so many of his
relatives to the death camps, Mr. Kissinger might as well have been writing of
himself. All the same, you have to wonder where the moral foundations of such a
survivor are to be found.

Mr. Isaacson concludes that as Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger was a
realist eventually defeated by his failure to understand the strain of idealism
in the American character, which came to oppose him in the form of
anti-Communist conservatives and of liberals pressing the cause of human rights.
But searching for the moral base of Mr. Kissinger as Secretary of State and
watching him vaporize in his retirement into celebrityhood and grandiose
business consulting, you have to wonder if the explanation of his success as a
statesman wasn't a little different. Perhaps the good that Mr. Kissinger did
came about not despite American idealism but because of it. Perhaps it was the
framework of this country's moralism that ultimately shaped the goals of his
amoralism.

This is a possibility that Mr. Isaacson never considers and in fact seems
unlikely in the light of his closely reasoned narrative. Yet it seems a way of
reconciling the impossible contradictions of this brilliant and disturbing study
of power.

NAME: Henry A. Kissinger

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry A. Kissinger (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton Readies Answer to Bush On Draft Issue

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1848 words

DATELINE: EUGENE, Ore., Sept. 14


Choosing to confront an issue he had declared himself finished with three weeks
ago, Bill Clinton abruptly altered his campaign schedule and flew from here
today to defend himself against an anticipated attack by President Bush on the
subject of Mr. Clinton and the draft during the Vietnam War.

It was not at all clear that Mr. Bush would attack Mr. Clinton directly. One
Bush campaign official, Leslie Goodman, a deputy director of communications,
said she firmly expected it. But Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman,
obviously pleased by Mr. Clinton's consternation, was deliberately vague.

And privately, Bush aides traveling with the President in Oregon suggested this
evening that Mr. Bush would probably not attack Mr. Clinton's draft record
directly -- at least not now.

Feeling Vulnerable

What was clear was that the mere fear of an attack was enough to send his
Democratic rival rushing to counter any possible move by the President,
underscoring how vulnerable the Democratic nominee feels about his escape from
military induction in 1969, and his changing explanations of his actions that
year.

Mr. Clinton, who had earlier declined an invitation to speak before the National
Guard Association meeting in Salt Lake City this week, changed his mind this
morning after learning that Mr. Bush had decided to replace Vice President Dan
Quayle as the convention's schedule speaker on Tuesday morning, Clinton campaign
aides said.

Ms. Goodman said in a telephone interview that the President would discuss Mr.
Clinton and the draft on the issue of trust.

Bush campaign operatives see Mr. Clinton as vulnerable not so much because he
did not serve in the military during the Vietnam War but because his
explanations of why he did not have followed such a tortuous path since the
issue arose this year.

In the early days, Mr. Clinton had a simple story: After a four-year deferment
at Georgetown University, he was exposed to the draft for a relatively brief
period and was lucky. He was never called.

In the months since, that story has become much more complex. Incrementally but
overwhelmingly, a picture of Mr. Clinton has emerged as a young man who went to
great lengths to avoid the draft and to equally great lengths to minimize that
politically awkward fact in the years afterward.

The anticipation of this sort of assault led Mr. Clinton to rush to try to speak
in Salt Lake City at 10:30 A.M. Tuesday, after the President's 9 A.M. speech.

The arrangement is the second such in a month; three weeks ago Mr. Clinton
followed Mr. Bush in speaking before the American Legion, an occasion on which
the Democrat delivered what he said was his final statement on the Vietnam War
and the draft.

Stomping Out the Fires

"We're not going to take any guff off of George Bush," said Paul Begala, Mr.
Clinton's chief speech writer. "We are not going to let his little brush fires
get started. We're going to go there and stomp them out quick."

Mr. Clinton declined to acknowledge the reason for his trip to Salt Lake City,
saying only that he had always wanted to go to the National Guard convention,
because he was concerned with issues that affected the guard.

When asked if he planned to respond to any attack by President Bush, Mr. Clinton
replied: "I have no idea what he's going to say. I only know he's going to go
there. But I expect inconsistency."

Mr. Clinton's decision to fly to Salt Lake City interrupts a scheduled three-day
West Coast political tour.

The candidate was enthusiastically received by tens of thousands of people in a
morning rally in downtown Portland, Ore., where he focused on the economy, which
he regards as Mr. Bush's great weakness.

Interview With Don Imus

What may have been a preview of Mr. Clinton's remarks to the National Guard
Association came in an early morning interview today with a New York talk-show
host, Don Imus.

This morning, as he sat in his kitchen after his daily jogging session, Mr.
Clinton was interviewed by Mr. Imus through a telephone hookup. It was Mr.
Imus's friendly interview during the New York primary in April that helped Mr.
Clinton retool a badly damaged public image.

Now, after several weeks of more questions about the draft, at the beginning of
a week in which the Republicans are expected to redouble their attack on the
subject, Mr. Clinton turned to Mr. Imus again.

"Let me ask you about the draft," Mr. Imus said. "Anything you wish you did
differently back in 1969 or that you said differently during the campaign?"

The candidate replied: "In terms of whether I could have handled it better in
the beginning of the campaign, I think there's no question about that.  You
know, I'd like to explain why I didn't do such a good job of it. I didn't go
back through all my letters, notes, to try to put this all back together again
because this issue has been raised on me before in Arkansas. And, when it had,
everybody involved back when all the players were still living, everybody who
had been involved in it, said that I did nothing wrong. And no one involved in
it in all the years I was running ever suggested I did anything wrong until the
beginning of this year.

"And so I think I was always kind of playing catch up because I gave a lot of
answers to questions kind of off the top of my head, halfway on the run when the
press would hit me. And you don't remember everything after 23 years, every
detail and every specific."

Blaming His Enemies

He went on at far greater length than he had in addressing the issue in recent
weeks, blaming assorted Republicans and political enemies for spreading stories
about him.

When the question first began making national news last spring, Mr. Clinton
stayed with the story he began telling in 1978 when the matter was first raised,
during the Arkansas governor's race that year. His political opponent accused
him of having avoided the draft by gaining a deferment through enrolling in the
Reserve Officer's Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas in 1969.

Mr. Clinton replied that after a four-year deferment from the draft granted
while he was a undergraduate student at Georgetown University, he was eligible
for induction while a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in England but had
been fortunate enough to never receive the call.

The matter rested largely unexplored until February 1992, when The Wall Street
Journal printed a lengthy article asserting that Mr. Clinton had in fact gained
a crucial deferment by promising in the summer to enroll in the Reserve Officers
Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas in 1969. The article said
Mr. Clinton's promise to attend the University of Arkansas Law School and
participate in the R.O.T.C. program there had won him a change in his draft
status, shielding him from the draft.

Having secured the deferment, Mr. Clinton broke his promise, choosing not to
enroll at the University of Arkansas after all, or to join the R.O.T.C. program,
but to remain another year in Oxford and then go to Yale Law School, The Journal
said.

In response to the article, Mr. Clinton said he decided in September or October
of 1969 that it would be wrong for him to take the R.O.T.C. deferment, when
other young men he knew were taking their chances on the draft. "I had high
school classmates who were already dead," he said. "I decided it was an
inappropriate thing to do."

So, he said, he informed Col. Eugene L. Holmes, the director of the R.O.T.C.
program, that he would not participate in R.O.T.C.; he did this in September, or
early October, he recalled. On Oct. 30, his draft status was changed from 1-D
deferment to 1-A eligibility.

It is not, however, entirely clear when he told the R.O.T.C. program that he
would not attend. While he said he told Colonel Holmes in the early fall, Lieut.
Col. Clinton D. Jones, Colonel Holmes's deputy and the director of procurement
for the University of Arkansas R.O.T.C. program, said in an interview last week
that neither he nor Colonel Holmes knew of Mr. Clinton's change of heart until
they received a letter in December, after he drew a high number in the draft
lottery, protecting him from being called up.

Within a few days of the first article, The Journal challenged Mr. Clinton's
explanation with the December letter.  In the letter, Mr. Clinton offered an
explanation for his decision to risk exposure to the draft that contradicted
what he had told The Journal.

"I decided to accept the draft despite my political beliefs for one reason: to
maintain my political viability within the system," the 23-year-old Mr. Clinton
wrote.

A Friend's Letters

The story turned another corner in April, when The Los Angeles Times printed
excerpts from letters Clifford Jackson wrote to friends in the spring of 1969.
Mr. Jackson, a Little Rock lawyer who was a Fulbright Scholar at Oxford when Mr.
Clinton was a Rhodes Scholar, says he and others helped Mr. Clinton put together
an aggressive campaign to secure the R.O.T.C. slot after Mr. Clinton received an
induction notice in late April 1969.

The excerpts from Mr. Jackson's letters described a young Mr. Clinton in the
spring of 1969 as "feverishly trying to find a way to avoid entering the Army as
a drafted private," with Mr. Jackson enlisting "several of my friends in
influential positions, trying to pull strings on Bill's behalf," and with Mr.
Clinton ultimately "wiggling his way back to Oxford."

More importantly, the excerpts also contained this line: "Bill Clinton, friend
and Rhodes received an induction notice." This forced Mr. Clinton to make his
third significant amendment to his explanation, admitting that he had received
an induction notice.

Previously, in dozens of interviews on the subject of the draft, Mr. Clinton had
never mentioned the induction notice, and at least twice he had denied having
ever been called up.

In acknowledging his induction, Mr. Clinton said that he had received the notice
late after the call-up date had passed and that he had therefore been able to
secure a delay until July 28, which gave him time to return to Arkansas and
secure the R.O.T.C. deferment. "I gladly would have told you this, if it had
even occurred to me that this was relevant," he told reporters.

Mr. Jackson's assertion that Mr. Clinton arranged a campaign of political
influence to secure the delay and the R.O.T.C. slot is unproven and has been
denied by Mr. Clinton.

After dropping from public view for several months, the draft issue came back
two weeks ago, when The Los Angeles Times published an article asserting that
Mr. Clinton's uncle, Raymond Clinton, had led a political lobbying effort to
gain his nephew a slot in the Naval Reserve program in Hot Springs, Ark., in an
effort to help protect Mr. Clinton until he secured the R.O.T.C. deferment.

In his immediate responses to questions on the matter, Mr. Clinton said
repeatedly that the assertions in The Times article were a surprise to him.
"It's all news to me," he said, and "I know nothing about it."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton ofArkansas is showered with roses following
his noontime address at Pioneer Square as he campaigned yesterday in Portland,
Ore. He also traveled to Eugene. (Associated Press) (pg. A23)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. PANEL BACKING BROADCAST TO ASIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


A Congressional commission recommended today that the United States expand
broadcasting to China and other Asian Communist nations with programs that
support democratic movements and provide uncensored news of events in those
countries.

But the 11-member commission, established by Congress in October 1991 with
strong bipartisan support, was sharply divided over whether to set up new
services for Asia similar to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, or to rely on
the existing network of the Voice of America. The issue now goes to Congress,
where hearings begin in the Senate on Tuesday.

The majority of the commission supported the Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty
option, preferring the system that served Eastern Europe and the the Soviet
Union as surrogate local stations, often in support of dissidents. The Voice of
America, whose commentaries reflect American policies, has an international
scope for news and features that are similar to the BBC's world service.

Tuesday's Senate hearings were called by Senator Joseph R. Biden, Democrat of
Delaware, who introduced legislation in the summer to create a Radio Free China.

The commission, headed by John Hughes, a former director of the Voice of
America, recommended that broadcasts featuring local news and commentary also be
beamed to Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, North Korea and Myanmar, formerly Burma.

"We ourselves added Burma because it is one of the most repressive regimes in
the world," Mr. Hughes said at a news conference, where members of the
commission brought their differences into a heated open debate.

The dissenters to the recommendation to establish new "radio free Asias"
included the Chinese-born writer Nien Cheng, author of "Life and Death in
Shanghai," and Merle D. Goldman, professor of Chinese history at Boston
University. Professor Goldman argued that the Voice of America had both access
to dissidents and credibility in China, qualities that are not likely to be
attributed to a surrogate station based on Taiwan or in Hong Kong.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Leon Davis, 85, Head of Health-Care Union, Dies

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


Leon J. Davis, a Russian immigrant who founded a small New York union of
drugstore clerks in Depression-era 1932 and built it into America's largest
labor organization of health care workers, died yesterday at Long Island Jewish
Medical Center. He was 85 years old and lived in Queens and in Lake Worth, Fla.

He died of heart failure, union officials said.

Mr. Davis, who retired a decade ago, was more than a founder and president of
Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union: he was a
virtual patriarch to its generations of clerks, janitors, aides, orderlies,
laundry workers, porters, dishwashers, elevator operators and other low-profile
employees in hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacies.

Host of Innovations

In a turbulent half-century at the helm, he led major walkouts in New York in
1959 and 1962 and in Charleston, S.C., in 1969, was twice jailed for defying
antistrike injunctions, helped overturn Federal and state laws that exempted
health care workers from collective bargaining, and was instrumental in raising
the wages, working conditions, living standards and dignity of thousands he
called America's forgotten workers.

Under Mr. Davis, Local 1199 grew to a peak of 150,000 members in the late 1970's
and became one of the country's most progressive unions. It was among the first
to establish basic education and training programs for members, innovative
health care and low- and middle-income housing for their families and
scholarships and vacation camps for their children.

In the 1960's, it was one of the first unions to oppose American involvement in
the Vietnam War, to campaign against nuclear proliferation and to join the civil
rights movement, mustering thousands of members for protests and marches. The
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King called it "my favorite union."

"The cause of justice and equality for workers everywhere in this city has lost
a true champion," Mayor David N. Dinkins said in a tribute at City Hall
yesterday. "Leon Davis pioneered in the campaign to win basic rights for
hitherto forgotten health care workers back in the 1950's."

Dennis Rivera, the union's current president, recalled that when Dr. King was
assassinated in 1968, Mr. Davis "said we would build no monuments in his memory,
but would instead build our union in his image in the struggle to end poverty,
racism, injustice and war." Mr. Rivera added: "I can think of no better epitaph
today for Leon Davis."

Troubled by Impact of Strikes

A short man with a mane of gray who sometimes wore a flowing beard that gave him
the Moses-like aura of a law-giver, Mr. Davis was a formidable opponent at the
bargaining table. He could wheedle, cajole, threaten, scream and soft-soap, when
necessary, and his foes regarded him as abrasive and sometimes impossible to
deal with.

But away from negotiations and confrontations at picket lines and protests, he
was a gentle, almost shy man, friends said, a connoisseur of art, music and the
theater who read literature in three languages, saw almost every play on
Broadway and tended roses in the small garden of his home in Flushing.

Those closest to him said it troubled his conscience deeply that hospital and
nursing home patients sometimes suffered during his union's strikes. But in
making painful choices, they said, he regarded his members' welfare as his first
priority.

And, unlike many other union leaders in an era that saw corruption and greed in
the labor movement, Mr. Davis's integrity was never questioned. Indeed, he made
it a rule never to take a salary greater that those the union had won for its
highest-paid members, and was receiving less than $40,000 a year when he
retired.

Questioned on Political Beliefs

Leon Julius Davis was born on Nov. 21, 1906, in Pinsk, Russia, and went to the
United States in 1921 at the age of 15. He settled with an aunt in Hartford,
learned to speak English, attended public schools and moved to New York in 1927
after his mother and father migrated there.

He attended the Columbia School of Pharmacy, but quit in the second year of a
three-year course and became a drugstore clerk. In 1932, he and a half-dozen
other clerks founded the union that was to be his life's work; he became a
$16-a-week organizer, the union's only salaried officer, and was elected
president in 1940 in the organization's first election.

In 1948, Mr. Davis refused to tell a Congressional committee whether he was a
member of the Communist Party, though he testified that the Communists and the
labor movement supported many of the same social objectives. Later, he said
publicly that he was not a Communist and that he had not answered because he
believed the committee had no right "to probe my personal beliefs."

Until 1959, Local 1199 represented only 5,000 drugstore workers. But Mr. Davis
led organizing walkouts of 46 days in 1959 and 56 days 1962 that added tens of
thousands of unskilled hospital workers who had been paid so little -- $26 to
$32 a week -- that many were on welfare. Mr. Davis was jailed for 30 days in the
1962 walkout and again for 10 days during a 113-day hospital workers strike he
led in Charleston, S.C., in 1969.

Growth in Membership

Spurred by the 1969 strike, Davis-led organizing drives in the 1970's added
thousands of professional and technical workers in private, nonprofit hospitals
and nursing homes to the non-professional membership, including registered
nurses and home care workers. Eventually, 1199 spawned affiliates in 20 states
and the union reached a peak of 150,000 members.

Today, many of those members have joined other unions, and Local 1199, now
unaffiliated with any other union, has more than 100,000 members in the New York
area, 65 percent of them black and Hispanic women. About half the members are
covered by contracts with 55 major hospitals represented by the League of
Voluntary Hospitals; it will give a $400 minimum wage this year to workers who
made $32 a week in 1959, along with extensive benefits won by Mr. Davis.

Largely through Mr. Davis's efforts, a New York State law denying health care
workers in nonprofit institutions the right to bargain collectively was repealed
in 1963 and a similar exemption in Federal law was overturned in 1974.

Mr. Davis was succeeded as president in 1982 by Doris Turner, who led an
unsuccessful 46-day strike in 1984 and was succeeded by Mr. Rivera in 1986.

Mr. Davis is survived by his wife, the former Julia Gaberman, a retired social
worker; two daughters, Jo Ubogy, of Cos Cob, Conn., and Liane Vida, of Lawrence,
Kan., and two grandchildren.

NAME: Leon J. Davis

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Leon J. Davis (The New York Times, 1973)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Trenton Lawmakers Pass Bill Allowing for Night Curfews

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Sept. 14


The New Jersey Senate gave final passage today to an ordinance that would let
municipalities impose nighttime curfews on juveniles and hold parents
responsible for seeing that their children obey them.

The bill, which passed the Assembly last month by a vote of 67-0, passed the
Senate without debate today by a 35-0 vote. It now goes to Gov. Jim Florio, who
has expressed growing concern over the problem of juvenile crime but has not
said specifically whether he would sign the bill.

The measure was introduced in February in response to increasing crime and
violence by teen-agers, and was given more impetus recently by the growing
number of car thefts in Newark.

The bill does not impose a statewide curfew, but allows municipalities to enact
restrictions so long as they also spell out certain exceptions, like going to
work, school, or church functions.

Concern Over Appeals

The bill was amended earlier to include language requiring that any local curfew
ordinance "establish clear standards in precise language" that would make clear
to both juveniles and their parents what is permitted and what is not, and also
to prevent "subjective and discriminatory enforcement" by the police.

The language is intended in part to fend off legal challenges that have been
raised against curfews in the past.

In 1987, a state court overturned a curfew in Bordentown, ruling that it was
unconstitutionally vague and too broad, and that it denied a minor's right to
equal protection under the law. The Burlington County Superior Court also said
the city had no "compelling government interest" in so stringently restricting a
minor's fundamental rights.

The Bordentown ordinance had barred minors from being in public places from 9
P.M. until 6 A.M. unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or on "an emergency
errand" or "legitimate business" approved by the parent or guardian.

Exceptions to Curfews

The bill enacted today lets municipalities make it unlawful for anyone under 18
to be "on any public street or in a public place between the hours of 10 P.M.
and 6 A.M.," unless they are with a parent or guardian or unless they are going
to or from work. It would also allow for exceptions to let juveniles run errands
involving medical emergencies and attend school, religious, or cultural events.

The bill's chief sponsor, Senator Ronald L. Rice, Democrat of Newark, said: "We
cannot allow any delay in authorizing cities and towns to move ahead with a
curfew act that has some teeth in it. It's like a battle out there in the
streets. I fought in Vietnam but I don't want to have to fight on the streets of
my home to survive."

"We have drug dealers taking over neighborhoods, kids stealing cars for fun and
all kinds of mischief going on at night," said Mr. Rice, who is a former Newark
police officer.

The bill would let communities impose fines on violators of up to $1,000 and
community service. Parents or guardians who allow juvenile to violate the curfew
would also be liable to the same punishment.

Senator Rice said the bill "sends a message to parents and to teen-agers that
we're not going to put up with this nonsense any more." He added, "This is
serious business."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


To the Editor:

President Bush in his address to the American Legion (front page, Aug. 26) vowed
that we would not recognize the Vietnamese Government and exchange diplomats
until the prisoner of war-missing in action issue has been resolved. If this is
an example of his foreign policy expertise, proclaimed as one of his main assets
qualifying him for another term, I beg to differ. The opposite seems to me to be
indicated.

The fighting in Indochina ended some 20 years ago. No serious student of that
war will deny that our involvement in an area we knew so little about was a
tragic mistake. It is time our Government leads the American people with the
maturity expected from a superpower, admits this and acts accordingly. The first
step would be to normalize relations with Hanoi, which would quickly lead to
resolution on the prisoners and missing.

Otherwise, it is Washington, rather than Hanoi, that is largely responsible for
continuing the trauma of the families who believe that their servicemen are
alive in Vietnam. And it is Mr. Bush who must accept his share for the backward
way that he has been handling this foreign policy issue.

WALTER A. SHELDON
Lido Beach, L.I., Aug. 27, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam;
Begin With the Truth

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


To the Editor:

In "What's Still Missing on M.I.A.'s" (editorial, Aug. 18), you seem surprised
that "official Washington misrepresented what it knew" about United States
forces missing in action in Vietnam in 1973, and that the Government betrayed
"its obligation to the families of the missing and the public at large." Perhaps
the real reason there never has been an explanation or apology on the M.I.A.
issue is that our Government has never told the American people the truth about
our involvement in Vietnam.

From the beginning, everything about it was a lie: from the fabricated attack on
the destroyers Turner Joy and Maddox, which led to the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution; through the call to arms to my generation to preserve "freedom and
democracy" for a Government that jailed citizens who spoke against it; through
the term of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, who knew in 1965 that the war
could not be won, yet continued to order young men and women to Vietnam for
three more years until his 1968 resignation; through the infamous Phoenix
program, which carried out assassinations of more than 20,000 "suspected"
Vietcong leaders.

Through Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, who ordered the secret bombing of a
neutral Cambodia; through our Government's denial that United States troops were
even exposed to chemicals such as Agent Orange and, when that did not work, the
claim that the effects of exposure posed no health risks; right up through
Ronald Reagan, who as President called America's involvement in Vietnam "a noble
cause."

There was nothing noble about America's war in Vietnam, in which 58,000
Americans died. More than two million Vietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians were
killed, most of them civilians. The United States officially lists just over
2,000 of its troops missing, but nobody acknowledges the hundreds of thousands
of Vietnamese, Cambodians and Laotians still missing. Millions more were
uprooted from their homes and villages, and the countryside throughout the
region was virtually destroyed.

Vietnam is not a syndrome that needs to be buried; it is a country struggling to
join the community of nations. It is a country that has put the war behind and
made friends with thousands of America's Vietnam veterans. It looks forward to
the day United States products can be sold in its markets and United States
technology becomes part of daily life.

But before this can happen, we must begin speaking the truth and finally put an
end to America's "Vietnam War."

JOHN F. TERZANO
President, Vietnam Veterans
of America Foundation
Washington, Aug. 21, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam;
American Heroes Too

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


To the Editor:

Bill Clinton explained to the American Legion convention (front page, Aug. 26)
that he would have gone to Vietnam if drafted, but he was relieved when his
draft number did not come up, "because I believed so strongly that our policy in
Vietnam was wrong." Mr. Clinton, myself and many others who opposed the war took
a middle ground, avoiding going to Vietnam, yet not risking much to stop the
war. Some did more.

I remember another front-page story, from the spring of 1966, about the
court-martial in Vietnam of Flukie Suarez. Flukie was a 21-year-old black man I
worked with in the civil rights movement. He and I drove from Louisiana to
Washington in the fall of 1965 to participate in an antiwar demonstration.

About six weeks after we returned to Louisiana, Flukie was drafted, and he went
into the Army and went through basic training. He made his statement against the
war once he got to Vietnam by refusing to accept a weapon. He was sentenced to
two years imprisonment.

There were others I knew in the South who felt strongly enough against the war
to go to prison. I remember being in court with a young man who refused the
Government's offer of conscientious objector status because he believed that
accepting it would facilitate the war. The judge expressed admiration for his
character, then sentenced him to two years in prison.

Flukie and others saw the war as more than an unwise policy choice. They opposed
it because they believed our country was the bad guy in Vietnam. They saw no
justification for the killing that came on the television news, and they felt
they should do what they could to stop it.

I do not know what happened to Flukie or the others whose war opposition led
them to prison. I suspect life has not treated them well, particularly those
like Flukie who were black as well as convicted felons. For myself, when choice
came down to going into the Army, going to jail or returning to law school, I
went back to law school.

Without wishing to take anything from the soldiers, sailors and armies who
carried out Lyndon Johnson's orders, I suggest the country owes respect to
Flukie and others like him who, in their own ways, were American heroes.

GRIER H. RAGGIO JR.
New York, Aug. 28, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Time to Normalize Relations With Vietnam;
Clinton and Draft

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


To the Editor:

As one who came of political age in the 1960's, I am of the same generation as
Dan Quayle and Bill Clinton. Like them, I was not a hippie, but a typical young
adult trying to sort out the political and social changes that seemed so
overwhelming at that time. I would like to take issue with Dan Quayle's defense
of his joining the National Guard, which he claims was a patriotic deed, at the
expense of Bill Clinton's search for a deferment, which Mr. Quayle calls
unpatriotic.

Many of us were against the war in Vietnam, and many did not wish to fight in a
conflict they felt was morally wrong in a place where the casualties were
devastating. We all knew that among the methods of avoiding a trip to Vietnam
were seeking deferments or joining the National Guard, which most often, was not
sent to war but stayed on the home front.

It was not always easy to join the Guard because so many men clamored to get in.
Indeed, in many areas of the country, one had to seek special favors to be
accepted into the Guard. The standing armed forces were then large enough to do
the fighting.

It seems to me Bill Clinton did the honorable thing in the 1960's by being
honest about his reasons for not wanting to join the armed forces. He faced his
draft board with courage and conviction. Mr. Quayle dodged the issue by joining
the National Guard and continues to dodge it by being less than forthright about
his reasons for doing so.

MARILYN S. KUSHNER
Bloomfield, N.J., Aug. 24, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Death of a Fighter Pilot

BYLINE: By By Mark Crispin Miller;  Mark Crispin Miller, professor of media
studies at the Johns Hopkins University, is author of the forthcoming
"Spectacle: Operation Desert Storm and the Triumph of Illusion."

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE


Remember how the air war of Operation Desert Storm always looked, or sounded, as
if John Ford had directed it? Day after day, U.S. pilots seemed to pick off
every enemy jet they aimed at, while the Iraqi pilots always seemed to miss.

"We've destroyed 29 Iraqi aircraft -- with not one air-to-air loss on the part
of the coalition," claimed Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf at a briefing in Riyadh on
Jan. 30. "The score is totally one-sided," President Bush asserted at a press
conference six days later. "In fact [in] every engagement in the air, the Iraqi
planes and pilots have gone down." Newspapers and television generally passed
along this version of events, reporting that no allied planes had been shot
down.

Even after the war, the Pentagon continued to promote a "totally one-sided" air
victory. "The Iraqi air force never really got into the air," claims a postwar
study by the Air Force. "Those few pilots that did go aloft did not do well." In
the Pentagon's final report to Congress, "Conduct of the Persian Gulf War," the
claim was repeated: "Coalition planes destroyed 41 Iraqi aircraft and
helicopters in air-to-air combat without suffering a confirmed loss to Iraqi
aircraft."

But the air war was not quite the shutout that the U.S. propagandists kept
extolling. Just hours into Desert Storm, an engagement in the air claimed the
war's first U.S. casualty: Lieut. Comdr. Michael Scott Speicher, killed when his
plane was blown to bits by an Iraqi MIG-25 -- and not, as the Pentagon has told
the public, by a ground-to-air missile.

Early on Jan. 17, 1991, Comdr. Mike Anderson was leading Navy Squadron VFA-81 in
the first wave of the allied air assault. The squadron -- based on the aircraft
carrier Saratoga in the Red Sea -- was headed north-northeast, at an altitude of
roughly 30,000 feet. Because of the nature of the mission, each pilot had to fly
alone.

When the team was about 40 miles from its targets, the squadron leader picked up
an enemy aircraft some 3,000 feet above him, and speeding in his direction: "He
was going very fast," Commander Anderson recalled in a recent interview. "He was
headed west-southwest and trying to get around me." As the two planes started
circling each other, the squadron leader got a good look at the Iraqi plane: "I
got a radar contact on him first, and then I had a visual contact on him. I was
very positive it was a MIG-25."

Early in that face-off, Commander Anderson asked repeatedly for permission to
shoot. "I kept calling 'MIG-25' to the control agencies -- to the Awacs," he
said. Such cautiousness was a strict requirement early in the air war, when the
skies were filled with coalition aircraft. In order to avoid "blue-on-blue"
encounters ("friendly fire"), the U.S. Rules of Engagement forbade a pilot's
shooting at another plane without approval from the Awacs surveillance radar
aircraft, whose crew could, theoretically, tell the good guys from the bad. And
so, with that MIG right in front of him, Commander Anderson asked to be allowed
to fire.

Permission was refused. "They didn't see him," he said. "My controlling Awacs
did not see him."

Why? The Awacs can be foiled by a rare phenomenon called the "Doppler notch."
When two aircraft are flying at or near the same speed and in the same general
direction, both planes can vanish from the Awacs's radar screens. Unless there
was some human error, the MIG seems to have been obscured by this unusual
glitch. And so, with no confirming blip before them, the Awacs personnel --
quite properly -- ordered the squadron leader not to fire.

After three turns, the MIG broke away and headed toward the east. Commander
Anderson proceeded on his course. A few minutes later, at 3:52 A.M., he was
startled by an intense flash. The explosion occurred somewhere off to the east
-- where Scott Speicher had been flying.

In the military, there was little question as to how the airman died. "The day
after he got shot down," recalled Capt. Carlos Johnson, a naval intelligence
officer, "I told the people down here at Cecil Field [in Florida] how he got
shot down." As director of a Navy research group set up to analyze U.S. air
losses during the war, Captain Johnson was immediately sent all pertinent data
from the gulf. The group then reconstructed the event. "We were pretty sure at
the beginning," said Captain Johnson in a recent interview. "Then, by the end of
the war, we were pretty much able to prove that [the attack] was the only
logical explanation -- other than his aircraft disintegrating."

Captain Johnson deems such "catastrophic aircraft failure" unlikely -- nor does
anyone believe that the FA-18 was hit by anything launched from the ground.
"There were no missiles deployed to the area," Commander Anderson noted. "And at
our altitudes, there was no way that a triple-A round [antiaircraft fire] could
shoot him down." Nevertheless, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney announced that a
surface-to-air missile had been the likely cause of death.

A cynic might insist that such official lying is a patriotic duty in wartime,
for the sake of our morale. Whether just or not, such a rationale is now
irrelevant. Yet the lie lives on. Here is the entire official treatment of the
incident, as given in the Pentagon's final report. "Fortunately, all but one
plane (an FA-18 from the U.S.S. Saratoga) returned safely." A page later, the
Speicher episode is further obfuscated by an upbeat description of another
event, "a MIG shootdown by an FA-18 pilot, VFA-81, from U.S.S. Saratoga." The
passage -- which is anonymous -- ends with this suspicious bellow of esprit de
corps: "Our relief in having successfully completed the strike without loss to
ourselves was overwhelming."

Why this suppression of the facts? The Speicher incident, first of all,
disproves the central myth of Desert Storm: that war had now been made
predictable -- and even safe -- by high-technology. In this case, it was not
that things were really going wrong, as with our futile air campaign against the
Scuds. Rather, the problem here was that a U.S. pilot had died in spite of an
efficient system.

"Commander Anderson did what was right," said one Navy pilot who spoke on the
condition of anonymity. This airman, who flew in the gulf, was equally
supportive of the Awacs personnel. "The guy controlling the situation said, 'No,
you don't have enough indicators to say that he's Iraqi, so don't shoot him,' "
the airman recalled. "But that kind of thinking probably saved thousands of
American lives." Nor had the Awacs malfunctioned. As Commander Anderson
admitted, "I can't change physics, nor can anybody else. If [the MIG] was in
their Doppler notch, they couldn't see it. They had no evidence a plane was
there."

There also seem to be less conscious motivations at work. Those overseeing the
gulf war could not face the fact that an Iraqi pilot managed to kill one of our
own and get away. Some within the military note the denial underlying the
Speicher incident. "I could never for the life of me figure why people don't
want to admit that we had an air-to-air loss," wondered one Naval officer, who
also spoke on the condition of anonymity. "But that's really the gist of it.
It's mostly an ego issue, as far as I'm concerned." That refusal to acknowledge
any loss was surely hardened by the American perception of Iraqi "backwardness"
-- much as in Vietnam, where U.S. officers likewise deemed the enemy too
primitive to thwart our gleaming weaponry.

Whatever the reasons for the cover-up, it slights the bravery of the pilots by
censoring the dangers that they really faced. More important, the thick cloud of
propaganda that was used to sell us Desert Storm betrayed the very notion of
democracy, enforcing our wide-eyed support by keeping us all in the dark. "His
people have been lied to -- denied the truth," President Bush said of Saddam
Hussein in a speech to Congress in March 1991. Such systematic lying is indeed
outrageous. Could it have happened here?

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Garret G. Ackerson, 88, Envoy In East Europe During Cold War

BYLINE: By LEE A. DANIELS

SECTION: Section D; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


Garret G. Ackerson Jr., a retired career Foreign Service officer who headed
United States legations and embassies in Eastern Europe during some of the most
difficult periods of the cold war, died Monday at his home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 88 years old.

Mr. Ackerson, who had long suffered from Parkinson's disease, died of kidney
failure, said his daughter, Rhoda A. Weyr of Manhattan.

In 1957 as the temporary charge d'affaires of the United States Embassy in
Budapest, Mr. Ackerson was host to Josef Cardinal Mindszenty, the Roman Catholic
primate of Hungary, who had taken refuge in the legation after the Soviet Union
had crushed the Hungarian uprising in October 1956.

It was Mr. Ackerson's second tour in Budapest in a difficult period. In 1940 Mr.
Ackerson was the last American diplomat to leave Budapest, where he had served
for five years and where his first wife, Rhodita Ellen Edwards, had used the
diplomatic immunity of their home to hide refugees fleeing Poland after World
War II began in September 1939.

Mr. Ackerson also served as counselor and charge d'affaires in Warsaw and Prague
in the early 1950's. From 1955 to 1957 he was the United States minister in
Buenos Aires, arriving there just months before the dictator Juan Peron was
ousted.

Mr. Ackerson, who was born in Hackensack, N.J., joined the Foreign Service after
receiving his bachelor's degree from Harvard College in 1927. The next year he
was given his first posting, to Cape Town, South Africa, as vice consul. His
other postings during his 33-year career included Peru, Colombia, Cuba, and
Denmark.

In 1949 Mr. Ackerson was removed from his post of chief of the division of
Southeast European Affairs at the State Department after refusing to dismiss
several staff members whom Senator Joseph R. McCarthy had accused of being
leftists.

Mr. Ackerson retired from the Foreign Service from his post in Budapest in 1961
and was appointed European director of the International Rescue Committee, a
private refugee agency. He went to Vietnam in 1968 shortly before the Tet
offensive to set up the agency's refugee relief effort for Vietnamese and
Cambodian refugees. He retired from the agency in 1987.

Mr. Ackerson's first wife, Rhodita Ellen Edwards, died in 1971.

Besides his daughter, Mr. Ackerson is survived by his second wife, the former
Suzanne Addor; two sons, Garret G. Ackerson 3d of Grand Rapids, Mich., and
Edmund E. Ackerson of Belmont, Mass., 12 grandchildren and eight
great-grandchildren.

NAME: Garret G. Ackerson Jr.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ohio Voters;
Smattering of Fire but Mostly Unease in a District That Bush Carried in '88

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: LAKEWOOD, Ohio, Sept. 15


A few weeks ago, Jane Shade got so scared at what she saw on the nightly news
that she did something she had never done before: she registered to vote.

What frightened the 30-year-old housewife was how well Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas was doing in the polls compared with her choice in the fall election,
President Bush.

"I think George Bush is in trouble and he needs every vote he can get," Mrs.
Shade said as she sat on her front steps here with her two young children. "If
Clinton is elected, I'm scared taxes will go up."

On the other side of this middle-class suburb of tidy lawns, wooden porch swings
and American flags almost as common as curtains, Michael Burke, 32, said he,
too, had recently been shocked into action.

"This country can't afford another four years of George Bush and the
Republicans," Mr. Burke said. "I registered to vote for the first time in my
life about a month ago, right after I got laid off."

Once Solid, but Not Now

Officials in both parties point to Ohio and its neighbors in the industrial
heartland as a make-or-break front in the fall campaign. Recent history, at
least, is on Mr. Bush's side.

Four years ago he handily won Ohio, including the largely white 19th
Congressional District, where Lakewood is situated, about 10 miles west of
Cleveland. The Democrats have carried the state only three times since 1948.

But things change. According to a new New York Times/CBS News poll, the contest
in Ohio is a tossup.

Judging by the voices heard in Lakewood, where 97.2 percent of the 60,000
residents are white, the story is no different in this worried but comfortable
pocket of America, which in 1992 had 9,762 registered Democrats, 4,115
Republicans and 22,360 independents.

"I voted for Bush the last time," said James Clay, a 30-year-old plate maker for
a printing company. "Now it seems like he's kind of lost in the wilderness."

Turned Off by Both

But others, like 31-year-old Marty Steward, a computer programmer, who voted
against Mr. Bush last time, now say they are moving toward casting their ballot
for him this time because "he is a known quantity."

Still, if the election were held today, disillusion and disgust would give both
candidates a run for their money.

"I'm not happy about either guy," said Larry Lansberry, a 24-year-old auto-parts
salesman. "I think I'll probably stay home on Election Day."

Even when people say they are supporting a particular candidate, many qualify
their statements.

"I'll probably vote for Clinton," said Janet Birchard, a 49-year-old fraud
investigator for the Cuyahoga County welfare office. "Why? Let me chose my words
carefully: Because the alternative is so repulsive."

Ms. Birchard said health care was her No. 1 Presidential issue. In better times,
character might be an issue, she said, but "it's not a primary concern to me
because I think there are character flaws, serious ones, on both sides."

But here, as in so much of America, the most important issue on almost
everyone's list was the economy. Education, homelessness and health care were
frequently mentioned as major but still secondary issues in more than two dozen
interviews.

As he hurried down Quail Street, a copy of "The Perfect Resume" under his arm,
Robert Jacobs, 35, said: "I think Clinton has a good chance because of the
economy. People want a change. We need one."

A Rock-Ribbed Republican

Not everyone agrees. A few blocks away, Mike Greene, a 27-year-old car salesman,
declared, "I'm 100 percent Republican. Always have been, always will be."

The economy, Mr. Greene said, is his primary concern, though national defense is
also important. He said he considered Mr. Clinton weak on military and foreign
affairs.

He said he was confident that most of his friends and co-workers would be voting
for Mr. Bush. Then Mr. Greene tested his theory. "Anyone voting for Clinton?" he
shouted with a smirk to his colleagues in the showroom.

Of the six salesmen nearby, only Duane R. Spence raised his hand.

"They just think they're Republicans," Mr. Spence said, flashing a smirk of his
own at his co-workers. "But they don't make enough to be Republicans. They're
fooling themselves."

Down Detroit Street, Wendy McKenzie was working her second job, at a flower
shop. She is also a secretary.

"These days you have to work two jobs to get by," she said. "Right now, I'm
leaning toward Bush. I have three kids and education is very, very important to
me. I like Bush's voucher plan. My kids should be able to attend the school of
their choice."

Ms. McKenzie, 31, is leaning but has not fallen. She said that she voted for Mr.
Bush in 1988 but that she had not made up her mind this time.

So the door remains open for Mr. Clinton, though not as widely as a few weeks
ago, before the latest reports about his draft record in the Vietnam War.

"I believe he's been lying about that," Ms. McKenzie said. "And if he's going to
lie about that, what won't he lie about when it's really important?"

But for everyone who worried about Mr. Clinton's record, someone else held up
Vice President Dan Quayle and his own military record as an antidote. Mr. Quayle
served in the Indiana National Guard during the war.

Rose Slavick, 65, was making her neat lawn neater when she stopped to talk
politics. An American flag was flying from her red-brick front porch.

"I have my flag out every day except rainy ones," she said. "I'm a patriot and a
Democrat from way, way back. So was my father."

Mrs. Slavick said she would support Mr. Clinton. "He hasn't been totally honest
about the draft business," she said, "but Quayle avoided it, too. So they're
even-steven on that."

Deborah Dawson, a 31-year-old mental-health therapist, has not decided who to
support. She voted for Mr. Bush in 1988 but said he had performed poorly ever
since.

Still, she said, she has reservations about Mr. Clinton because "I'm concerned
about his knowledge of world issues."

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I think George Bush is in trouble and he needs every vote he
can get," said Jane Shade of Lakewood, Ohio, who registered to vote after
hearing that Gov. Bill Clinton was ahead in the polls. "If Clinton is elected,
I'm scared taxes will go up." With her were her children, Abigail, left, and
Eric; "I have my flag out every day except rainy ones," said Rose Slavick of
Lakewood. Mrs. Slavick said she was supporting Gov. Bill Clinton for President.
"I'm a patriot and a Democrat from way, way back." (Photographs by Roger
Mastroianni for The New York Times)

Chart: "How Ohio Voters Compare With the U.S."

OHIO

If the Presidential election were held today:

Would vote for George Bush and Dan Quayle     43%

Would vote for Bill Clinton and Al Gore     44

If the election for House of Representatives were held today:

Would vote for Republican candidate     43%

Would voter for Democratic candidate     38

UNITED STATES

If the Presidential election were held today:

Would vote for George Bush and Dan Quayle     37%

Would vote for Bill Clinton and Al Gore     49

If the election for House of Representatives were held today:

Would vote for Republican candidate     35%

Would voter for Democratic candidate     45

Based on telephone interviews conducted by The New York Times and CBS News with
678 registered voters in Ohio from Sept. 12 to Sept. 14 and with 1,006
registered voters nationwide from Sept. 9 to Sept. 13.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: 12TH DISTRICT;
REP. SOLARZ LOSES IN A NEW DISTRICT

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


United States Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent from
Brooklyn, was defeated for re-election last night by Nydia M. Velazquez, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico's former representative in New York, in a Democratic
primary. Ms. Velazquez was thus virtually assured of becoming the first Hispanic
woman elected to represent New York City in Congress.

Ms. Velazquez, 39 years old, did what political analysts said was virtually
impossible, winning in the newly drawn 12th Congressional District, despite a
crowded field of five Hispanic candidates and Mr. Solarz's overwhelming campaign
fund of $2 million, more than all the other candidates combined.

A Hispanic District

Mr. Solarz had struggled to save his career after legislators in Albany wiped
out his old Brooklyn district. He took the risk of running in a district drawn
specifically to maximize Hispanic voting strength.

Ms. Velazquez, who moved into the lead because of overwhelming Hispanic support
in Brooklyn , had drawn the strong support of Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and organized labor. A second Hispanic candidate, Elizabeth Colon,
weakened Mr. Solarz by drawing many of the white and Asian votes he needed for
victory.

The final results showed Ms. Velazquez (pronounced Veh-LA-skehz) with 33 percent
of the vote, Mr. Solarz with 27 percent and Ms. Colon at 26 percent. The other
three candidates had 14 percent between them.

At her victory party, Ms. Velazquez was flanked by the Mayor and by Manhattan
Borough President Ruth W. Messinger. Representative Jose Serrano of the Bronx,
introduced her, saying, "I no longer will be the only Puerto Rican in Congress."
She called her primary victory "a historic moment." In a Bushwick, Brooklyn,
campaign headquarters, Mr. Solarz, 52, mused about the end of his political
career after 18 years in Congress and six years in the New York State Assembly.

"I know there will be other opportunities to serve in my life," said Mr. Solarz.
"Elective office is not the only way to do something constructive."

He said that when he entered the race for the 12th Congressional District, he
had underestimated the anger his decision would spark in the Hispanic community.

"If I made any miscalculations, I did not fully anticipate the firestorm my
decision would bring," he said.

In his concession speech he said he had no regrets about the campaign. "We gave
it our all," he said.

The defeat of Mr. Solarz, chairman of a foreign affairs subcommittee, followed
the decision by eight other members of the New York Congressional delegation not
to seek re-election this year.

Mr. Solarz was swept into Congress in 1974, one of the young insurgents who rode
to victory in the wake of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal. But in a
year of anti-incumbent sentiment, the Brooklyn Democrat, who was once considered
invincible, emerged as one of the worst abusers of the check-writing privileges
of the House bank. He wrote 743 overdrafts over a three-year period.

Mr. Solarz's second political blow came when, despite months of lobbying for a
safe district, he saw his Brooklyn base splintered into six parts in the state's
redistricting.

Instead, with the $2 million in contributions he had amassed, he announced his
decision to run in the 12th Congressional District, which had been drawn to
enhance the political power of Hispanics, who were nearly 60 percent of the
district.

The decision echoed eerily this week after the sudden death of Mr. Weiss, which
left the city's Democratic leaders pleading with voters to support a dead man
rather than risk electing the fringe candidate who was the lone figure left on
the ballot.

Despite his lack of renown in the new district, stretching from Queens through
lower Manhattan and then into sections of Brooklyn, Mr. Solarz was expected to
benefit from his enormous advantage in contributions and from the competition
among five Hispanic candidates.

The city's Hispanic leaders bitterly denounced Mr. Solarz but were unable to
coalesce around another candidate. Dennis Rivera, the powerful president of
Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Workers Union, supported Ms.
Velazquez. Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer backed Ms. Colon, 40, the
executive director of the Association of Puerto Rican Executive Directors.

The other candidates in the race were Ruben Franco, the former president and
general counsel of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund; Eric Ruano
Melendez, 44, a civil engineer; and Rafael Mendez, 42, an assistant professor of
psychology.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Stephen J. Solarz conceding defeat last night.
With him at the Sunset Park Cafe in Brooklyn was his wife, Nina. (Keith
Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. B8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words



International     A3-15

THE SUFFERING OF SUDAN

In the southern Sudan, war, famine and the Government's scorched-earth policy
have displaced more than a million people, but constant shelling means that
relief flights have been only sporadic.  A1

U.N. AS ECOLOGICAL BATTLEFIELD

The 47th United Nations General Assembly convened today, poised for a new battle
between the West and developing countries over environmental issues.  A10

TAKING AIM AT THE EUROCRATS

Taking a cue from the Thatcherites, the French are fearful of the homogenizing
effect a European "super state" might have.  A12

Italy says its voters would ratify the European Union pact.  A12

THE VIEW FROM NUMBER 8

Serbian gun position Number 8, and emplacements like it, afford a commanding
advantage, but the war in Sarajevo does not appear to be one they wish to win in
any conventional sense.  A3

PENTAGON CHANGES COPTER STORY

After denying that a U.S. helicopter had been hit by gunfire in Bosnia, the
Pentagon said today that closer in inspection revealed a small bullet hole.  A3

PERU'S SHANTYTOWN WAR RAGES

The violence continues uninterrupted in the shantytowns of Lima, despite the
fact that the leader of the Shining Path, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, is now behind
bars.  A10

FROM ATLANTA TO BAGHDAD

A bank fraud case in Atlanta has shed light on how Iraq illegally obtained
billions of dollars in loans, some of which was vital to Saddam Hussein's arms
buildup.A6

A LOSS FOR MEXICO'S OPPOSITION

The future of the major Mexican opposition party was in doubt as a member of the
governing party moved into the Governor's office in the historically left-wing
state of Michoacan.  A13

INDIAN POPULATION SOARING

India, with a population of about 882 million, is likely to overtake China as
the world's most populous country by 2035, a report predicts. A9

Toshiba reportedly sold China a machine that may improve missiles.  A7
North and South Korea open their eighth round of direct talks.  A8
Political and economic tensions are forcing Lebanese to leave.  A5
Light sentences in attack on foreigner stir debate in Germany.  A14
Two leading Kurdish parties will merge their guerrilla units.  A15
Umm el Fahm Journal: Islam flowers in Israel.  A4

National     A16-22

NOMINEES POLITELY SPAR

Speaking to National Guard officers, President Bush took note of the questions
on Gov. Bill Clinton's draft record, but maintained a distance from them.
Speaking to the same group, Mr. Clinton, in turn, ignored the issue altogether.
A1

CLINTON KEEPS HIS LEAD

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows Gov. Clinton has the backing of 49
percent of the voters overall, while 37 percent say they are supporting
President Bush. The poll highlights the formidable task facing Mr. Bush and his
new political team.  A1

Politics and the economy in a suburban Ohio town.  A17

BANK PREMIUMS CUT IN HALF

Bowing to political pressure, Federal regulators slashed in half a proposed
increase in the insurance premiums banks pay to the deposit insurance fund --
and exempted three-quarters of the industry from any increase.  A1

STORM RUINS GO UP IN SMOKE

With so much debris from Hurricane Andrew gathering dust and attracting pests,
southern Florida communities have had to do away with civilized niceties like
trash separation, recycling and environmentally safe disposal for the quick, raw
relief offered by fire.  A16

Senators agreed to rebuild a scaled-down base in Homestead.  A16

BEHAVIOR AND BRAIN CHANGE

A study has found that behavior modification therapy, like drug therapy,
produces changes in the brains of people with obsessive compulsive disorder. It
is the first time that behavior therapy has been shown to physically alter brain
function in a mental disorder.  A20

PLANETS BEYOND PLUTO?

Astronomers have detected a small, faint object beyond Neptune and Pluto that
could be the first direct evidence of a broad belt of icy minor planets that may
be the source of many comets streaking in from the fringes of the solar system.
A22

The first gene therapy treatment for lung cancer is approved.  A20

Simi Valley Journal: chili and white supremacists.  A16
Turning attention to the armed robbery of cars from drivers.  A21

Education Page   B10
Colorado will vote on giving parents public money to teach at home.
Brown announces an unusual plan to endow chairs for junior professors.
Campus Journal: Students plan mountain-climbing for a cause.

Metro Digest   B1

ABRAMS SEEN AS VICTOR

State Attorney General Robert Abrams apparently edged out former Representative
Geraldine A. Ferraro in a bitterly close race for the Democratic nomination for
United States Senate from New York, setting the stage for a tough fight with the
Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato.  A1

SOLARZ DEFEATED

United States Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the nine-term incumbent from
Brooklyn, was defeated for re-election by Nydia M. Velazquez, who was thus
virtually assured of becoming the first Hispanic woman elected to represent New
York City in Congress.  A1

LETTING PUPILS PICK SCHOOLS

Joseph A. Fernandez, the New York City Schools Chancellor, will let parents send
their children to any school throughout the five boroughs next year, giving the
city one of the largest school-choice arrangements in the nation.  A1

Business Digest   D1

Living Section   C1-10
 Emilia-Romagna: What Italians say to mean "the best." C1
At the door with Drew Nieporent.  C1
Serving up gardens by the glass, juice bars flow into the mainstream.  C1
Right out of the 60's, with plenty of hair.  C8
Wine Talk C10

Health Page   C14
Medicine by phone takes hold in some areas.
Personal Health: Why patients fail to comply with medical advice.

Arts/Entertainment  C15-22
Matisse vs. music.  C15
Lincoln Center nominates programming director.  C15
Anthony Perkins's wife describes two years of secrecy.  C15
Music: Honoring Alice Tully.  C15

Sports   B11-16
Baseball:White Sox top Yanks.  B11
Mets still waiting for lefty.  B13
Basketball: Nets' Mills accepts Pistons' offer.  B11
Columns: Vecsey on the Garden.  B11
Chass on Baseball.  B13
Football: DuBose ready to return to Irish.  B11
Handley opens up.  B15
A test for Thomas.  B15
Hockey: Rangers' Kovalwv gets attention.  B16
Devils stage a derby at center.  B16
Islander payroll mirrors performance.  B16
Sports People B14

Obituaries   D25
Walter B. Jones, Democratic Representative of North Carolina.
Dr. Alexander Marble, an expert on diabetes.
Garret G. Ackerson Jr., an envoy in Eastern Europe during cold war.

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials
Bill Clinton's Vietnam test, cont'd.
Don't gut credit reform.
Gay bashing, the Quayle way.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Great expectations.
Hans Magnus Enzensberger: Balkan tribalism, as Uganda sees it.
Alan C. Michaels: Baseball's charade.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test, Cont'd.

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 442 words


President Bush had the grace to say in his speech to the National Guard
Association yesterday that never to have seen "the awful horror of battle" did
not mean "you can never be Commander in Chief." By forgoing a more frontal
attack on Bill Clinton's record of draft avoidance, Mr. Bush conveyed an
impression of moral magnanimity.

It's only an impression; his co-campaigners, including Vice President Quayle,
are still picking at the scab. "Once again he has misled us," Mr. Quayle said
yesterday while campaigning in South Dakota.

By Governor Clinton's own admission he has handled this issue badly. Having
failed to explain himself clearly, he remains vulnerable on his position on
draft avoidance.

Successive generations have looked differently on going off to war, depending in
part on whether the cause was righteous like World War II or divisive like
Vietnam. Whatever their feelings, voters are rightly interested in how national
candidates reacted to the demands imposed by the wars of their time.

Many young men served and died, some fled to Canada and many, like Mr. Clinton,
delayed being drafted in various ways. The evidence remains incomplete, but in
view of the Governor's confusing responses some of the doubts may fairly be
resolved against him.

That evidence indicates that he gave his Arkansas draft board a runaround in
1968 and 1969. He signaled his intention to join an R.O.T.C. unit, then withdrew
about the time his draft exposure abated, and he thanked an R.O.T.C. official
for "saving me from the draft."

Even so, fairness compels weighing his conduct against that of thousands of
other young men -- including Dan Quayle -- who pulled every string and tried
every trick to escape going to Vietnam. What's more relevant than what he did
then is what he says now. The Republican focus remains effective because of Mr.
Clinton's checkered responses to numerous damaging disclosures.

For example, Mr. Clinton at first denied having been called up for service at
one point in 1969. Later, confronted with the disclosure that he had in fact
received an induction notice, he lamely explained that the induction notice was
ineffective and thus not worth mentioning.

And just the other day, when asked about a report that a relative sought favored
treatment for him in 1969, he gave an offhand but arguably misleading answer:
"It's all news to me." That overlooked the fact that he had been informed of the
allegation just last spring.

In 1969 and again in 1992 Mr. Clinton rendered a respectable accounting of his
views about the Vietnam War. But his accounting now for his actions then remains
unpersuasive.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview;
Bush and Clinton Lob Economic Plans

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


The Presidential race moved into a transcontinental bidding war on the economy
and compassion today as President Bush offered a $500 million tax credit to
companies that provide family emergency leaves and Gov. Bill Clinton outlined a
$1.5 billion program to revive the inner cities.

Campaigning at opposite ends of the country -- Mr. Bush in the Oval Office and
Mr. Clinton in Los Angeles -- both candidates tried to focus attention on their
economic proposals.

Trying to move beyond questions about his draft status in the Vietnam War, Mr.
Clinton traveled to the precincts of Los Angeles that were shattered by rioting
last spring and sought to put flesh on the economic proposals he has outlined in
recent months in vague terms.

Subsidized Savings Accounts

The Democratic Presidential nominee offered a plan to "move people from welfare
to payrolls to businesses," which would include the creation of banks to
stimulate investment in urban areas and federally subsidized savings accounts
for the urban and rural poor. Mr. Clinton backed up his appeal with a new
television commercial that showed him sitting on his desk with an American flag
behind him, declaring that "government just isn't working for the hard-working
families of America."

Mr. Bush, taking a day off from the stump, remained in Washington, where he put
the final touches on what aides said would be a "major economic speech" that he
would make on Thursday. His aim, they said, is to draw a point-by-point contrast
between his ideas and Mr. Clinton's.

Pursuing the White House's effort to undermine public trust in his opponent, the
President "will point out the economic consequences if you follow the Clinton
plan -- higher taxes, re-regulation among them -- and make the case that
Americans can't afford to take those risks," said Judy Smith, deputy White House
press secretary.

This morning Mr. Bush called Republican lawmakers to the White House to provide
a forum for announcing his own family leave plan -- to give companies with fewer
than 500 employees a tax credit of up to $1,200 if they give their workers leave
for personal and family emergencies.

No Expectation of Passage

Mr. Bush called on Congress to take up his bill immediately. But White House
officials acknowledged that the President was sending the measure to Capitol
Hill at this late date with no expectation that it would get any real
consideration, much less actual passage, before Election Day.

The bill, which the White House was still drafting as Mr. Bush announced it at
the hastily scheduled meeting with the Republican lawmakers, was primarily
intended to give the President political cover if he carried out his threat to
veto another family leave measure that was passed by Congress last week and
would require companies to give their workers unpaid emergency leaves.

Clearly vexed at being cornered on such a politically popular issue as family
leave so close to the election, Mr. Bush complained testily about the timing of
the family-leave bill that was sent to him by Congress, calling it "very
peculiar and highly political."

The Congressional bill would require businesses with more than 50 employees to
provide unpaid leave in family emergencies. The President has threatened to veto
it, and he accused Congress today of trying to force him into a politically
embarrassing position by sending him the bill so close to the election.

But the White House seemed hard pressed to explain why Mr. Bush was sending up
his own bill now. The President vetoed a family leave measure in 1990, saying he
opposed the idea of requiring businesses to provide leaves, but he did not offer
any alternative bill.

Mr. Bush's proposal would cost $400 million to $500 million, the White House
said, promising to offer cuts in other programs to avoid increasing the Federal
budget deficit.

It would provide credits of up to $20 a day for as many as 60 days of leave in
any 12-month period, or a maximum of $1,200 per employee, and would cover
companies with fewer than 500 workers, the White House said.

Mr. Clinton wasted no time attacking the Bush proposal. He called it part of the
President's "continuing pander parade" and said the President "has no idea how
he'll pay for it."

Mr. Clinton, who was called the "pander bear" by former Senator Paul E. Tsongas
in the Democratic primaries, also has done little to explain how he would pay
for his own ambitious economic plans.

Speaking at a job-training center in South-Central Los Angeles to a mostly black
and Hispanic audience of about 1,000, Mr. Clinton promised a series of programs
that his issues director, Bruce Reed, said would cost $1.5 billion a year. They
include these steps:

*Adding 95 federally supported "community development banks" to the five that
now exist in poor rural and urban areas, at a cost of $150 million a year for
four years.

*Establishing 1,000 "micro-enterprise programs," which are smaller versions of
the community banks where poor people could get loans of $500 or $1,000. The
cost: $50 million.

*Creating "individual development accounts" at a cost of $100 million a year for
five years. Families with incomes of up to $28,000 a year for a family of four
would be allowed to deposit up to $1,800 a year in an account earmarked for
education, job training or starting a small business; the Federal Government
would match their savings.

*Creating 75 to 125 enterprise zones in urban areas.

There are significant points of convergence between Mr. Clinton's plan and the
ideas that Mr. Bush put forward after the Los Angeles riots. Enterprise zones,
through which businesses would receive tax breaks and other incentives to locate
in blighted neighborhoods, are central to Mr. Bush's economic policy.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard N. Bond, Republican National chairman, left, speaking
with Nick Calio, assistant to the President for legislative affairs, after they
attended a meeting yesterday in Washington at which President Bush urged
Congress to offer a tax credit to companies that provide family emergency
leaves. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Millicent Fenwick, 82, Dies; Gave Character to Congress

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 25; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


Millicent H. Fenwick, a retired Republican Congresswoman renowned for her
political independence and championing of liberal causes, died yesterday at her
home in Bernardsville, N.J. She was 82 years old.

She died of heart failure, her family said.

"Millicent Fenwick was the Katharine Hepburn of politics," said Charles Millard,
a former aide and now a Republican New York City Councilman. "With her dignity
and elegance, she could get away with saying things others couldn't."

Mrs. Fenwick, whose colorful personality inspired cartoon characters, had a
varied career, including stints as a fashion model, an author and editor and
decades of public service in local, state and Federal elected and appointed
posts.

She was perhaps most widely known for her wit, zest and idiosyncrasies like pipe
smoking, a habit she adopted when her physician discouraged her from cigarettes.
Tall and patrician, but down-to-earth and pungent, she inspired the Lacey
Davenport character in Garry Trudeau's "Doonesbury" cartoons.

Watchdog of Helsinki Accords

On her substantive record, she won the respect of her political peers, sometimes
grudgingly, for her advocacy on a wide variety of issues, including civil
rights, peace in Vietnam, aid for asbestos victims, help for the poor, prison
reform, strip-mining controls, reduction of military programs, urban renewal,
campaign spending limits, gun control and restrictions on capital punishment.

Among Mrs. Fenwick's proudest achievements was being a lead sponsor of the
resolution creating the commission to monitor the 1975 Helsinki accords on human
rights.

Her views often placed her at odds with her party's leaders and seemed anomalous
for the wealthy district in New Jersey's horse country that she represented.
Fighting for bathrooms for migrant workers won her the nickname of Outhouse
Millie. Others called her the Bella Abzug of Somerset County, a nod to the
outspoken former Congresswoman.

She so frustrated Representative Wayne Hays, a Democrat of Ohio, that he once
threatened to withhold her staff's paychecks "if that woman doesn't sit down and
keep quiet."

Hail and Farewell and Oink

Although Mrs. Fenwick was strong willed, she often charmed her ideological
adversaries.

In a debate over equal rights for women, she once recalled, a male legislator
said: "I just don't like this amendment. I've always thought of women as
kissable, cuddly and smelling good." Her reply was classic Fenwick: "That's the
way I feel about men, too. I only hope for your sake that you haven't been
disappointed as often as I have."

When she left the State Assembly, one man kissed her, saying: "We male
chauvinist pigs all will miss you, Millicent, because you're a wonderful woman."

Mrs. Fenwick's political career flourished with age. She first ran and won a
seat in the State Legislature at the age of 59 and in Congress at 64. The
Congressional primary rival she beat was Thomas H. Kean, later elected Governor.

Gov. William T. Cahill appointed her as New Jersey's first director of consumer
affairs in 1972. Among her efforts were to protect car buyers from deceptive
advertising and to require funeral homes to itemize bills in advance.

Lost Narrowly to Lautenberg

Her Congressional tenure ended in 1982, when she ran for the United States
Senate and lost narrowly to Frank R. Lautenberg, a Democratic millionaire whose
big-spending campaign portrayed her as a doddering eccentric. She refused
political-action committee money.

After her loss, President Ronald Reagan appointed her as the first American
envoy to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization in Rome. She
retired from that post in 1987.

After a heart problem in the 1970's, she had several operations for a pacemaker
and a bypass of a leg artery.

Mrs. Fenwick was born in Manhattan to a prominent family with a tradition of
public service and grew up in a 50-room mansion in Bernardsville. Her father,
Ogden H. Hammond, was a financier and state legislator. When Mrs. Fenwick was 5,
her mother, the former Mary Stevens, drowned when a German submarine sank the
liner Lusitania. She was on a mission to Paris to create a hospital for war
victims.

Scandalized Her Family

Mrs. Fenwick attended the Foxcroft School in Virginia but left to accompany her
father to Spain when he served as the American ambassador under President Calvin
Coolidge.

Although she never received a high school diploma or college degree, she studied
philosophy under Bertrand Russell at the New School for Social Research and
studied at Columbia University. She was fluent in Italian, French and Spanish.

As a young woman, she scandalized her family by falling in love with a married
businessman, Hugh Fenwick. They later married, but it lasted only several years.
Mrs. Fenwick was left with two children and her husband's debts. Refusing money
from her family, she scraped by on her own.

She inherited a fortune when her father died in 1956 but remained frugal,
counting her change from coffee, using one lamp to work by and driving a
Chevrolet that stood out in a community of luxury automobiles. She placed her
assets in a blind trust to avoid political conflicts of interest.

She modeled briefly for Harper's Bazaar, then worked as a writer and editor at
Vogue magazine and compiled "Vogue's Book of Etiquette" (Simon & Schuster,
1948), which sold a million copies.

Surviving are her son, Hugh Jr. of Bernardsville, 11 grandchildren and three
great-grandchildren.

NAME: Millicent H. Fenwick

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Millicent Fenwick, who was the model for the Representative
Lacey Davenport character in Garry Trudeau's "Doonesbury" comic strip.
(Associated Press, 1982; Universal Press Syndicate)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Ex-R.O.T.C. Chief Accuses Clinton of Lying

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Sept. 17


A retired colonel who used to head the University of Arkansas R.O.T.C. program
released a statement today saying he believed Gov. Bill Clinton deceived him in
1969 to avoid being drafted.

The affidavit by Col. Eugene L. Holmes of Fayetteville seemed to contradict
statements made in 1978, when Mr. Clinton was making his first bid for governor
and was accused of applying to the Reserve Officer Training Corps in 1969 to
obtain a draft deferment. The colonel said then that he did not remember the
case but that Mr. Clinton had been a good attorney general and would have made a
fine Army officer.

In a statement issued Wednesday, the colonel said that he now remembered a
two-hour conversation with Mr. Clinton in 1969 and that Mr. Clinton had
purposely deceived him "both in concealing his anti-military activities overseas
and his counterfeit intentions for later military service."

"These actions cause me to question both his patriotism and his integrity,"
Colonel Holmes said.

Dee Dee Myers, a spokeswoman for Mr. Clinton, said the campaign found Mr.
Holmes's statement "very odd."

"I do feel that that its very curious that 23 years after the fact and 48 days
before the election Colonel Holmes has yet another recollection," she said.

The White House sought to capitalize on the statement, with its spokesman,
Marlin Fitzwater, telling reporters that it "deserves wide scrutiny."

In the affidavit, the colonel said he was prompted to prepare the document by
the "imminent danger to our country of a draft dodger becoming the commander in
chief of the armed forces." The statement was dated Sept. 7 and was faxed to The
Associated Press by his daughter, Linda Burnett. The colonel was unavailable for
comment.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TURMOIL IN EUROPE;
Crisis There, But Not Here
Little Impact Is Seen On Presidential Race

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words


During the 40 years of the cold war, foreign crises often helped American
Presidents win re-election, beginning with Harry S. Truman, the designated role
model of the 1992 campaign. The striking success of the Berlin airlift played a
significant part in Mr. Truman's upset victory in 1948.

Sometimes a President's failure to satisfy the nation that he was moving
effectively enough to defuse a crisis abroad contributed to his defeat. That was
the case with Jimmy Carter and the hostages in Iran in 1980.

But the currency crisis in Europe is another matter. American policies and
actions contributed relatively little to its development, and there is little
that Washington can do to alleviate it, economists believe. So there is not much
room, at least at the moment, for President Bush to strut his Presidential
stuff, demonstrating in the process how invaluable experience is, or much room
for Bill Clinton to view with alarm and call for more vigorous American
leadership.

"Up until now, the United States has been relatively unaffected," said David C.
Mulford, the Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs, noting that the
dollar had recovered recently.  That, he argued, showed that its earlier decline
constituted no adverse "pronouncement on the fundamentals of the U. S. economy."

If the turbulence in currency trading continued unabated, of course, it would
sooner or later cause trouble in other financial markets, and that might further
damage Mr. Bush, who is already regarded as an uncertain economic steward by
large majorities of voters, according to opinion polls. But the situation seemed
to be stabilizing yesterday as European governments maneuvered to restore order.

Few voters are likely to grasp, and fewer still to be swayed by, the nuances of
the situation -- for example, the fact that the United States was ill placed to
persuade the Europeans to lower their interest rates as a stimulus to growth,
which might have averted the crisis, at a time when its own huge deficits have
contributed to international difficulties.

Learned discussions about economic abstractions on the other side of the
Atlantic are not the same thing at all as an electorate bombarded on television
with questions about the fate of hostages. Americans, who even today buy many
fewer imported goods than Europeans, are not nearly so politically sensitive to
or knowledgeable about currency relationships.

Nonetheless, anything that keeps the spotlight on the economy or seems likely to
prolong the recession cannot do the President any good. And C. Fred Bergsten,
head of the Institute for International Economics, a Washington research group,
said that continued high interest rates and stagnating economies in Europe would
inhibit American exports, make it "very, very hard" for the United States to
emerge from recession anytime soon.

The sudden disintegration of the system linking European currencies -- and the
possibility that it may lead to the collapse of the hard-won Maastricht
agreement on greater European unity -- has other lessons to teach politicians in
the United States as well as those at its center.

One is the age-old lesson about the limits on the power of even the strongest
men and institutions, which apply with increasing force in modern political
economics. If George Bush has failed to make the American economy do his
bidding, he has plenty of company among Western political leaders.

The man at the center of the crisis is the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl. He is
one of the premier advocates of European unity, largely because it offers the
best way to defuse fears of German dominance among Germany's neighbors, born of
three wars in a century. Yet he has been caught in a policy vise that has almost
certainly slowed the movement toward unity.

German reunification is costing far more than Mr. Kohl or anyone else
calculated, but he is committed to it.  He has chosen to pay for it by running
up a deficit, and to stop that from causing the kind of runaway inflation that
destroyed the Weimar Republic in the 1930's, the German central bank has kept
interest rates high. Mr. Kohl could have raised taxes to pay for rebuilding the
East, but like other Western politicians in the last 10 or 15 years, he has come
to see higher taxes as a tool with an unacceptable political cost.

He could also have cut spending for other purposes, but that might have hurt his
re-election hopes.

Michel Camdessus, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, said
that budget deficits in Germany and Italy must be reduced quickly to restore
stability, and other officials of the fund argue that deficits in the United
States are siphoning off capital and slowing economic recovery.

"In Germany as in the United States, there is a lot of economic pain to be
allocated, and not much political will to allocate it," said Jeffrey Garten, the
author of "A Cold Peace," a new book about Germany, Japan and the United States
and their economic relations over the next decade. He said the world economy was
"in a rudderless situation," with inadequate leadership at home and abroad.

The power of modern, polycentric markets, with trading roaring ahead 24 hours a
day in London and New York and Frankfurt and Tokyo, has all but overwhelmed
governments. Using traditional tactics, the British poured hundreds of millions
into the markets to prop up the pound, and increased interest rates
dramatically, but they were pop-guns against the onrushing tanks of the currency
speculators.

Already, the momentum toward European unity has been weakened, and it will be
stopped in its tracks if the Maastricht Treaty is rejected by the French in a
referendum on Sunday. The Danes have already voted down the treaty, opinion in
Britain has turned negative and the Germans, if not their Government, are having
second thoughts about giving up the Deutsche mark.

'Nobody's Following Them'

"Our leaders find themselves marching along the road to unity," said a senior
European diplomat, "and nobody's following them. They forgot to bring public
opinion along, rather like Lyndon Johnson in Vietnam. It's a fundamental problem
in democratic societies, and a very serious one."

If European unity is stymied, European leaders and economies are likely for a
time to turn in upon themselves, considerably complicating the job of the next
President.

"Bush talked about the importance of increasing exports in his Detroit speech,
and that means Europe, among other places," said Robert Hormats, an investment
banker who has held ranking positions in several administrations. "But it's
going to be much harder to deal with Europe on trade questions, and it's going
to make the business environment much more difficult. Whether Clinton or Bush is
elected, the job will be tougher."

It will also require an economic team of considerable talent and finesse, just
as the cold war required national-security experts of a high order. Mr. Bush's
economic aides, most notably Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, have been
under fire for months from within his party as well as experts in other nations.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Mixing Radical Politics With TV in a Thriller

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 28; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 821 words



The Murder of Albert Einstein
By Todd Gitlin
297 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.

In his critically acclaimed book "The Sixties," Todd Gitlin recounted the rise
and fall of the New Left using reminiscences about his role in Students for a
Democratic Society. In "Inside Prime Time" and in the anthology "Watching
Television" (which he edited), he explored the cultural and ideological
implications of television. Now, in his first novel, "The Murder of Albert
Einstein," he combines those two seemingly unrelated interests, television and
radical politics, to produce a lucid if somewhat emotionally attenuated
philosophical thriller.

Mr. Gitlin's heroine and narrator is a Diane Sawyer knockoff: an attractive
40-ish broadcaster who works for a television show called "In Depth" that bears
more than a passing resemblance to "60 Minutes" or "Prime Time Live."

Margo Ross, as she's called, has done stories on everything from designer drugs
to arms merchants to oil spills. She's just finishing a profile on an aging pop
star named Billy Neill when she receives an urgent message on her answering
machine. It is a voice from the past, the voice of Harry Kramer, her onetime
mentor and idol, a man she hasn't laid eyes on in decades.

Back in the days when Margo was working for an underground magazine called Eight
Million Stories, Harry was celebrated in radical circles as the brilliant author
of "Fix," a novel "about an intelligence agency which runs drugs out of Vietnam
and schemes to assassinate a newly elected liberal President while pinning the
plot on a combine of Bolivian neo-Nazis and Sicilians cheated of their 99-year
leases on Cuban casinos." This time, Harry claims, he's uncovered a real-life
conspiracy. He tells Margo he's learned that Albert Einstein did not die a
natural death in 1955: he was murdered.

It seems a friend of Harry's has been working in a laboratory where tests are
being performed on tissue from Einstein's brain; the tests reveal that there was
enough methamphetamine in his system to kill him. Forget the usual motives, says
Harry; forget private gain, personal venom, revenge. "Suppose we remember," he
adds, "that people kill for ideas; this is the 20th century, after all. Then
we've got motives coming out our ears. This sweet old guy is a pacifist, he's a
socialist, he's a Jew, and it's 1955. Remember, in the 30's there were Nazi
agents trying to kill him."

Margo's instincts as a reporter are immediately engaged; she wants to break the
Einstein story on "In Depth." She and Harry start tracking down the people who
saw Einstein during the last days of his life. Two primary suspects emerge: a
colleague at the Institute for Advanced Study named Gustav Janousek, who is
known for his right-wing politics and hawkish views on the bomb; and an
eccentric if idealistic poet named Norman Gottehrer, whom Einstein befriended
toward the end of his life.

Both men, Margo and Harry speculate, had possible motives: Janousek could have
been enraged by Einstein's decision to sign an open letter calling on the great
powers to renounce war; Gottehrer could have been scared that Einstein was near
completing a unified field theory, a theory that could hypothetically result in
some awful new doomsday weapon.

As Margo and Harry close in on their suspects, there are menacing developments.
Margo starts receiving threatening phone calls, and her boss, Burke Gilman,
abruptly informs her that higher-ups at the station have killed her story.
Margo, meanwhile, finds herself falling in love with Harry, a development that
both alarms her -- she knows only too well Harry's disastrous history with women
-- and fills her with longings to trade in her high-powered career for a family
and a home.

Thanks perhaps to Mr. Gitlin's earlier work on "Inside Prime Time," the
descriptions of Margo's television show are funny and well observed, as are the
descriptions of Margo and Harry's radical past. There is never the sense that
Mr. Gitlin is simply regurgitating old research; for all the expository material
contained in this book (concerning everything from nuclear physics to television
technology), "The Murder of Albert Einstein" never feels particularly didactic.
Mr. Gitlin knows how to dramatize his ideas, and he knows how to create a
compelling plot.

What is missing from this novel is a real sense of character and psychology:
elements that might turn "The Murder of Albert Einstein" from a cerebral
thriller into a full-fledged literary novel with emotional chiaroscuro. Margo's
attraction to Harry, her regrets about her life and Harry's own feelings about
women, political commitments and work -- none of these issues are really
addressed, and the reader consequently cares little about Margo or Harry's fates
or the effects that the Einstein story has on their lives. No doubt Mr. Gitlin
will improve this aspect of his writing in his next novel.


LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Todd Gitlin (Ruth Rosen)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Clinton Asked Senator's Help On Draft, His Aides Confirm

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words

DATELINE: FAYETTEVILLE, Ark, Sept. 18


Gov. Bill Clinton's campaign organization acknowledged today that the candidate
sought help from Senator J. W.  Fulbright's office in 1969, when he was trying
to win a spot in the University of Arkansas Reserve Officers Training Corps to
avoid being drafted.

The question of what constitutes help is murky and illustrates the subjective
nature of what has become a long and tortured debate on just what Mr. Clinton
did or did not do to escape the draft during the Vietnam War.

Clinton campaign officials say a measure of assistance was given to Mr. Clinton
by his close friend and former boss, Lee Williams, who was then Senator
Fulbright's top aide. But they say this assistance was limited to providing Mr.
Clinton with advice.

But others, including the two Army officers who ran the R.O.T.C. program in
Arkansas, say that Senator Fulbright's office called them seeking to know what
could be done to help Mr. Clinton get into the program and thus keep him out of
the draft.

Asked whether Mr. Clinton had gone to Senator Fulbright's office for help in
entering the R.O.T.C., Dee Dee Myers, Mr. Clinton's spokeswoman, said the
Governor had "talked to the Fulbright people about what his options were and
asked them to help him ascertain those options, but he didn't ask anyone to
influence anyone on his behalf."

She added: "This is what Senatorial offices do. That's what taxpayers pay them
to do."

Mr. Clinton has always maintained that he received no "unusual or favorable
treatment." as he tried to avoid serving in Vietnam.

A document in the Fulbright archives at the University of Arkansas shows how the
Senator's office provided help. The single sheet of handwritten notes is sketchy
but suggests that in July 1969 the Senator's top aide discussed Mr. Clinton's
request to join the training program with Army officials and was familiar with
the details of the arrangement Mr. Clinton was seeking. A discussion of the memo
with the Senator's aide, Mr. Williams, supports this interpretation of the
document.

At the time Senators, other politicians and their staffs often exercised their
influence to help young men find alternative forms of military service when
faced with the draft, and the Fulbright archives show that the Senator was
providing assistance to a number of others at the same time.

The Democratic Presidential nominee had worked in Senator Fulbright's office a
year earlier, while he was a student at Georgetown University.

These matters have become an issue in the Presidential campaign not so much
because of the events 23 years ago but because of Mr. Clinton's difficulty this
year in giving a full account.

Mr. Clinton's explanations of the draft issue have grown so tangled over time
that the document in the Fulbright archives also supports Mr. Clinton in another
disputed area.

It shows that in July 1969, the Senator's office was discussing the terms of an
arrangement with the Army training program in just the way Mr. Clinton has
described them this year.

Col. Eugene Holmes, who commanded the university's R.O.T.C. program at the time,
issued an angry statement on Wednesday night charging that Mr. Clinton had
"defrauded the military" and "purposely deceived me."

In the statement and in a previous interview, Colonel Holmes asserted that he
had been led to believe that Mr. Clinton would enter the program right away and
then did not do it.

Trying to Finish at Oxford

But Mr. Clinton has been saying since February that Colonel Holmes agreed to let
him return to Oxford for a year with the R.O.T.C. deferment so he could complete
his studies as a Rhodes Scholar, and that he had promised to enroll at the
Arkansas law school the following year, in 1970.

Mr. Williams's notes appear to be the only existing record of any kind about the
arrangement between Mr. Clinton and Colonel Holmes, and they indicate that the
terms sought by Mr. Clinton, including the one-year delay, were at least under
discussion at the time.

The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette first reported on the document in March. An
article followed in The New York Post, but the notes received little more
attention at the time.

Written in a red felt-tip pen on a lined Senate pad, Mr. Williams's notes are a
series of broken phrases, names and phone numbers. They mention Mr. Clinton by
name, refer specifically to the arrangement he was seeking with the university's
R.O.T.C. program, including the request for a year's deferral, and set a date
for a phone call from Colonel Holmes.

Mr. Williams said in an interview this week that the notes were in his
handwriting but that he could not remember them. Mr. Williams, who speaks warmly
of the candidate, said they had kept in touch since the days Mr. Clinton worked
in the Senator's office. He said the notes suggested to him that he discussed
Mr. Clinton's situation with a member of the R.O.T.C. program staff and arranged
to make contact with Colonel Holmes on July 16, 1969.

"I don't remember having a conversation regarding Bill and R.O.T.C., but
obviously I had one according to the notes," he said.

Although they are not dated, the placement of Mr. William's notes in the
Fulbright files and mention of the telephone appointment indicate that the
Senate office was acting on Mr. Clinton's behalf during a critical period when
he had only a few weeks to find an alternative to being drafted and to persuade
his draft board to cancel a pending induction notice.

In the past Clinton campaign officials maintained that the candidate could not
recall contacting the Senator's office.

Asked about this in March, a Clinton spokeswoman, Max Parker, said in an article
in The New York Post, "Governor Clinton says he never asked anyone for help."

On Wednesday, a Clinton aide, Betsey Wright, said, "Governor Clinton has no
specific recollection of any specific actions," though she contended that it
would not have been unusual for Mr. Clinton to have spoken with Senator
Fulbright's office.

On Thursday Ms. Myers said that Mr. Clinton had asked Mr. Williams to help him,
and that Mr. Williams had apparently made efforts in this regard, but she
maintained that these efforts consisted of Mr. Williams's collecting information
about Mr. Clinton's options. Later that day, however, she added that she
believed the Clinton campaign had acknowledged a request for assistance from
Senator Fulbright's office earlier in the year.

Given a day to verify that an acknowledgment had already been made, the campaign
did not do so. This evening, Ms. Myers said the allegation that aides to Mr.
Fulbright had helped Mr. Clinton had "appeared in print, and we never disputed
it." She added: "I'm sure if anyone asked asked us about it we said, yes, it was
true. We all knew about it and always acknowledged it among ourselves. Clinton
probably acknowledged it at some point, but it probably never appeared in
print."

And, contrary to Mr. Clinton's earlier assertions, there is additional evidence
that he benefited from a larger effort in 1969 to escape the draft.

The notes from the Fulbright archive appear to be the only documentary evidence
of that. But Lieut. Col Clinton D. Jones, Colonel Holmes's deputy, recalled
receiving telephone calls from the offices of both Senator Fulbright and
Winthrop Rockefeller, the Governor at the time.

"They all said the same thing: could we do anything to help young Bill Clinton,"
Mr. Jones said in an interview. "I said the same thing to each, 'Probably. Have
him come in and see us.

But Colonel Jones also said he did not regard the calls as an attempt to put
political pressure on him. "There was no pressure from anyone," he said.
"Everything we did was legal.

The single page of notations from 1969 is part of a large collection of papers
including several boxes full of correspondence from many other young men seeking
help with the draft.

In Mr. Clinton's case, two of Mr. Williams' notations allude to the terms of the
arrangement.

One reads: "Comb basic -- 6 weeks, Fort Benning, Ga. Summer (1970)" apparently
referring to the month and a half of basic training at an Army base. This was a
standard requirement for R.O.T.C. cadets, and the date suggested that Mr.
Clinton would not begin it until the following year. The other is "must have
first year ROTC def," which apparently refers to Mr. Clinton's wish that he be
given a one-year deferment.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A document from July 1969 in Fulbright archives at the
University of Arkansas shows how Senator J. W. Fulbright's top aide discussed
Bill Clinton's request to join the training program with Army officials and was
familiar with the details of the arrangement he was seeking. (University of
Arkansas Libraries)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Former Military Chief Plans to Back Clinton

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President Bush and his
predecessor, Ronald Reagan, plans to endorse Mr. Bush's challenger, Gov. Bill
Clinton, a Clinton campaign aide said today.

Dee Dee Myers, the spokeswoman for the Clinton campaign, said Adm. William J.
Crowe Jr. would announce his endorsement in Little Rock, Ark., Saturday. Admiral
Crowe is now retired.

On Thursday, the political arm of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, which supported
Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush in the last three Presidential elections, said it would
make no endorsement this year.

The decision by the V.F.W.'s political action committee is a blow to President
Bush's campaign, which has made an issue of Mr. Clinton's effort to avoid
military service in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Solarz Difference

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


It is difficult to believe that Stephen Solarz, New York City's most
high-profile Representative, is through with politics after his loss in the
Democratic primary to Nydia Velazquez. With his old Brooklyn district carved up
by redistricting, Mr. Solarz sought a 10th term in a new district designed to
empower Hispanic voters. But ethnicity, anti-incumbency and the House Bank
scandal -- Mr. Solarz wrote 743 overdrafts -- combined to bring down a
legislator with exceptional abilities who at 50 has yet to achieve his
potential.

In a time when some Congressmen complain they can do nothing, Mr. Solarz showed
what a single energetic lawmaker can accomplish. Foreign policy was his main
interest, so he became a member or chairman of key subcommittees. Using this
leverage, he played a catalytic role in ending wars in Cambodia and Central
America, and hurrying the end of apartheid in South Africa and of the Marcos
dictatorship in the Philippines. He took on causes of high importance but little
visibility, like halting the spread of nuclear weapons to Pakistan.

Mr. Solarz traveled extensively, but unlike other junketeers he did his homework
and aggressively served as a diplomatic go-between, as in the negotiations that
brought United Nations peacemakers into Cambodia.

Though he came to Congress in 1974 as an anti-Vietnam War insurgent, Mr. Solarz
was an early Democratic supporter of the use of force in the Persian Gulf war.
His critics were quick to attribute this to Mr. Solarz's ill-concealed hope to
become Secretary of State. But ambition is no shame, and even those unable to
support him in this latest contest can hope, with respect, that he will find new
ways to serve the public.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UP AND COMING: Kyle Chandler and Tammy Lauren;
Everybody's Favorite Postwar Sweethearts

BYLINE: By ANDY MEISLER;  Andy Meisler has written about television for TV Guide
and California magazine.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Jeff and Ginger weren't supposed to have a long-term romance.

"Originally they were only going to be together for three episodes," says Lynn
Marie Latham, one of the creators and executive producers of the ABC series
"Home Front," which began its second season Thursday night at 9. "But when we
saw the dailies, we said, 'Wait a minute.' We saw it before everyone."

Whatever she saw (Matt Roush of USA Today called the couple "absolutely
adorable"; in Entertainment Weekly, Mark Harris referred to their
"off-the-charts chemistry") has created intense interest in Kyle Chandler and
Tammy Lauren. They play headstrong 1940's sweethearts with fresh-faced good
looks, just getting their start on the ladder to fame and fortune. Although the
series, a sort of populist nighttime soap set in Ohio right after World War II,
has 14 regular characters, about a third of all viewer mail concerns Jeff and
Ginger, according to the network's publicity department.

"I get a lot of letters from women," admits Mr. Chandler, who plays Jeff
Metcalf, the gallant but slightly wet-behind-the-ears young Cleveland Indian. He
turns to his co-star. "Do you remember that time we got mobbed at the Gap?"

Across the table, seated safely in the Warner Studios commissary, Ms. Lauren
shudders slightly. "It was crazy," says the actress who plays Ginger Szabo,
Jeff's feisty fiancee.

Last September, few gave "Home Front" much of a chance. Filling the time slot of
the much-lamented "Thirtysomething," it was filled with peplums, snoods,
jitterbug contests and vintage Packards, but also racial tension, labor unrest
and enough religious guilt and sexual frustration to outfit an early Philip Roth
novel. Early ratings were dismal.  By spring, however, the show had gained a
growing and often fervent following.

The hardy band of early "Home Front" watchers know that Jeff and Ginger met when
both were on the rebound. Ginger, an aspiring actress, was all set to marry her
G.I. boyfriend. But when she met his train at the station (in her wedding
dress), she ran into his Italian war bride first. Jeff, an aspiring baseball
player, had just wrenched his way out of the arms of the woman he loved (who,
unfortunately, was engaged to his brother, another returning G.I.).

Shellshocked, Jeff and Ginger spent an evening together, recoiled, then
acknowledged their mutual attraction and regrouped to sort out their
differences. Catholics both, they've vowed to abstain from sex before marriage.
Amid mounting waves of temptation, they've endured Ginger's failed screen test,
Jeff's agonizing slump during spring training, gossip about the fact that she is
two years older than he is, and heated arguments over such subjects as sports
superstitions, rumba lessons and china patterns.

In person, the two actors seem somewhat mismatched as well. The dark-haired and
baby-faced Mr. Chandler, a bit shy around interviewers, is a 27-year-old native
of Chicago who began studying acting ("I'd exhausted all my other options") at
the University of Georgia five years ago. He was signed to a nine-month
development deal with ABC, but the time ran out without any job offer having
materialized. After 18 months of auditioning, he won a recurring role as a
Vietnam-era soldier on the CBS series "Tour of Duty." "Home Front" is his second
series, and, in recognition of its success, he traded in his Volkswagen for a
Thunderbird.

Ms. Lauren drives a Jaguar. "I got it to try to grow up," she says. "At the time
I had a live-in boyfriend and a dog, so I bought a four-door sedan." A former
child actor, brought to Los Angeles by her parents, she was a regular on several
short-lived series (from "Angie" to "Out of the Blue").

At the age of 17, she successfully petitioned the court to declare her an
emancipated minor and allow her to conduct her own business affairs. Before
joining "Home Front," she had been out of work for a year, unable to make the
leap from teen-age to adult roles. "The transition comes," she says, "when you
look too old to play 16 but too young to play your real age." She will only say
that she is "twentysomething."

Ms. Lauren spent much of her summer doing promotional appearances for the
series. Mr. Chandler made his first feature film, "Pure Country," which stars
the country singer George Strait and is scheduled to open on Oct. 23.

No one at "Home Front" is saying where the two characters' relationship will go
from here. We only know that Jeff is coping with the difficulties of small-town
stardom. As for Ginger, she has gotten a job singing a tomato-juice jingle on
radio.

NAME: Kyle Chandler; Tammy Lauren

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kyle Chandler and Tammy Lauren as Jeff and Ginger -- Obvious
differences. (Andrew Eccles/ABC)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION VIEW;
Still Stupid After All These Years

BYLINE: By James Gorman

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words


"Life is the scariest thing there is." From "Middle Ages"
 Maybe. But television is a close second. "Thirtysomething" I loved to hate;
except for Melanie Mayron, the red-haired photographer, whom I just plain loved.
I never saw "Melrose Place," otherwise known as Twenty-Something, or "Beverly
Hills, 90210," which I suppose would be Ten-Something, so they didn't bother me.

But now there's a Forty-Something, with six episodes, under the enchanting alias
of "Middle Ages." This one hits close to home. It's about those adorable kids
who brought you the 60's and, as they aged badly, the 70's and the 80's. You
know, that generation. Well, now it's the 90's, and we're having a midlife
crisis -- Thursday nights at 10 P.M. on CBS. I can say "we." I'm a charter
member of this generation (43 years old, and I did inhale).

"Middle Ages" focuses on the lives and times of three white boys who used to
have their own rock-and-roll band and have since pursued various personal and
career paths that have left them now suddenly and worrisomely aware that they
are no longer lead guitarists. This does happen to be one of the major cultural
issues of the day, and I myself am taking flamenco guitar lessons to do my small
part to address it. So no one can say the series isn't true to life on this
point.

The "heroes" are Ron (Michael O'Keefe), a heartless, slick, Republican public
relations man who can't "commit" (commit what, is my question); Terry (William
Russ), a distributor of novelties who is trying to revive his guitar career,
and, most important, Walter (Peter Riegert), a hard-working, loving, suburban
father with a working wife and two kids -- the Clinton/Gore character.

The three had a girl singer in their band in the old days, but she dropped acid
and jumped off a building long ago so that we wouldn't have to watch a show
about a 43-year-old woman who used to sing rock-and-roll and is now having her
own midlife crisis. Viewers, presumably, are interested in middle-aged male
guitarists, but not middle-aged female singers. Instead we have a young and sexy
girl singer (Amy Brenneman) who is, at this very moment, only twenty-something,
doesn't wear a whole lot of clothes when she sings and, inevitably, falls for
the middle-aged novelty distributor -- a woman's fantasy if I've ever heard one.

There are other women in the series too, in the peripheral roles of bimbo, wise
old cleaning woman, sexual predator, and a pretty darn wholesome working mother
with knockout good looks and 0.5 percent body fat (Ashley Crow). And there are
some black characters (this is a 60's revival, after all) -- two musicians and
Ruby Dee as the cleaning woman, Estelle. She has been ennobled by her hard life,
unlike the screwed-up white women she works for, proving once again that poverty
is good for the soul. The black characters, for some unknown reason, are not
having midlife crises.

Since, presumably, this is supposed to be my life we're watching, I have a few
minor objections I'd like to register, now that I've seen five episodes on tape.
First of all, it's not my life. I don't happen to be a type. I happen to be a
unique individual human being, with qualities that make me different from any
other human being -- one leg that's shorter than the other, long fingernails on
one hand only (for flamenco), and a major crush on Frederica von Stade, a female
vocalist who happens to be over 25 and sings fully clothed.

Second, the other middle-aged white men I know are all unique too, and not all
in positive ways. Some of them are tone-deaf. Some are real guitarists. Others
have met midlife head on by taking up the violin instead of taking up with young
women. Some went to Vietnam, and others didn't, but the war -- curiously absent
from "Middle Ages" reminiscing -- certainly played a bigger role in all of their
lives than did young women jumping off buildings in their nightgowns. And,
although I am embarrassed to admit how different my circumstances must be from
those of the vast majority of Americans, I don't actually know anyone who has a
hand-held cellular phone, a prop so common in "Middle Ages" it is almost a
character itself.

Still, I suppose even those of us out of the cellular mainstream do make up a
recognizable generation, and those of us who have the time and energy to kick
back and have a guitar crisis do seem mostly to be white and male. And, if truth
be told, I think we probably have a pretty coherent opinion about television
shows that purport to feature us. Normally, I wouldn't feel comfortable speaking
for an entire generation, but everyone else is convinced that we're a uniform,
easily categorized group, so I don't see why I shouldn't be spokesfellow.

Here's what we really think: We -- the white male forty-somethings "Middle Ages"
is about -- are sick of us. We've been reading about and watching ourselves
since we went on our first protest march, and enough is enough. And, if we're
sick of ourselves, can you imagine how everyone else feels? True, we've had it
tough. As the world knows, our fathers never hugged us, we were never initiated
into manhood with drums and chants, we've suffered terribly from the slings and
arrows of outrageous feminism, and Jimmy Connors will never win the U.S. Open
again.

But let's be honest. Our problems are a bit like the cardiovascular health of
the French. Nobody is interested, not even the French themselves. Furthermore,
let me tell you what we do like to watch. Since I'm spokesfellow, my likes are
by definition the same as those of everybody else of my age, sex, skin tone, and
social and economic niche, so I didn't have to do a poll. What we like has
nothing to do with how old the actors and actresses are (except, of course, for
music videos, which we watch exclusively for the young women). Otherwise our
tastes are eclectic, wide-ranging, and unclassifiable, just like ourselves. We
watch tennis, the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament, Roseanne, bass fishing shows,
any science fiction movie, nature specials, opera, music videos when we have
insomnia, Swamp Thing, Sherlock Holmes, Count Duckula and Rug Rats. So, Mr. or
Ms. Cultural Elite, demographize that!

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Riegert of "Middle Ages" (CBS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Film Festival Starts And Finishes

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


From the earliest days of the New York Film Festival, which begins Friday with
Agnieszka Holland's "Olivier, Olivier" and ends on Oct. 11 with Irwin Winkler's
"Night and the City," a special glamour and sense of anticipation have
surrounded its opening and closing attractions. Here are the openers and closers
of the past three decades.

 1963: "The Exterminating Angel" (directed by Luis Bunuel), "Dragees au Poivre"
(directed by Jacques Baratier).



 1964: "Hamlet" (Grigori Kozintsev), "The Great City" (Satyajit Ray).

 1965: "Alphaville" (Jean-Luc Godard), "Red Beard" (Akira Kurosawa).

 1966: "Loves of a Blonde" (Milos Forman), "La Guerre Est Finie" (Alain
Resnais).

 1967: "The Battle of Algiers" (Gillo Pontecorvo), "Far From Vietnam" (Jean-Luc
Godard, Joris Ivens, William Klein, Claude Lelouch, Alan Resnais and Agnes
Varda).

 1968: "Capricious Summer" (Jiri Menzel), "The Fireman's Ball" (Milos Forman).

 1969: "Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice" (Paul Mazursky), "Oh! What a Lovely
War" (Richard Attenborough).

 1970: "The Wild Child" (Francois Truffaut), "Tristana" (Luis Bunuel).

 1971: "The Debut" (Gleb Panfilov), "Murmur of the Heart" (Louis Malle).

 1972: "Chloe in the Afternoon" (Eric Rohmer), "Last Tango in Paris" (Bernardo
Bertolucci).

 1973: "Day for Night" (Francois Truffaut), "Badlands" (Terrence Malick).

 1974: "Don't Cry With Your Mouth Full" (Pascal Thomas), "La Fantome de la
Liberte" (Luis Bunuel).

 1975: "Conversation Piece" (Luchino Visconti), "The Story of Adele H."
(Francois Truffaut).

 1976: "Small Change" (Francois Truffaut), "The Marquise of O" (Eric Rohmer).

 1977: "One Sings, the Other Doesn't" (Agnes Varda), "That Obscure Object of
Desire" (Luis Bunuel).

 1978: "A Wedding" (Robert Altman), "Violette" (Claude Chabrol).

 1979: "Luna" (Bernardo Bertolucci), "The Marriage of Maria Braun" (Rainer
Werner Fassbinder).

 1980: "Melvin and Howard" (Jonathan Demme), "The Last Metro" (Francois
Truffaut).

 1981: "Chariots of Fire" (Hugh Hudson), "Man of Iron" (Andrzej Wajda).

 1982: "Veronika Voss" (Rainer Werner Fassbinder), "Fitzcarraldo" (Werner Herzog
).

 1983: "The Big Chill" (Lawrence Kasdan), "Streamers" (Robert Altman).

 1984: "Country" (Richard Pearce), "Paris, Texas" (Wim Wenders).

 1985: "Ran" (Akira Kurosawa), "Chaos" (Paolo and Vittorio Taviani).

 1986: "Down by Law" (Jim Jarmusch), "Peggy Sue Got Married" (Francis Coppola).

 1987: "Dark Eyes" (Nikita Mikhalkov), "House of Games" (David Mamet).

 1988: "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown" (Pedro Almodovar), "Red
Sorghum" (Zhang Yimou).

 1989: "Too Beautiful for You" (Bertrand Blier), "Breaking In" (Bill Forsyth).

 1990: "Miller's Crossing" (Joel Coen), "The Nasty Girl" (Michael Verhoeven).

 1991: "The Double Life of Veronique" (Krzysztof Kieslowski), "Homicide" (David
Mamet).

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Milos Forman's "Fireman's Ball," the 1968 closing film.
(Czechoslovak Filmexport)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
The Flashbacks of a Festivalgoer

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1753 words


Halcyon Nights, and some not so, at the annual New York Film Festival. When it
opens Friday, the festival will be celebrating 30 years at the same Lincoln
Center stand. In that time, Rainer Werner Fassbinder has come and gone. Akira
Kurosawa, who already had a full body of work behind him in 1963, continues to
add to it today. Francois Truffaut is dead, but Jean-Luc Godard, who has had
more films at the festival than any other director (16 features, plus 5 short
films), goes on.

In the 30 years before that first New York festival, technicians invented
'scopes to make movies bigger and wider. Stereo sound was introduced. The great
three-strip Technicolor process achieved something close to perfection. Since
1963, three-strip Technicolor has been abandoned -- too expensive, and color
photography has been so improved that today a negative can fade to magenta
before a film has finished its first run.

As television has profoundly altered our political processes in these three
decades, video has transformed the business and art of movies. Theaters have
multiplied and shrunk. The movies they show have become portable. "Lawrence of
Arabia" fits into a hip pocket. Almost anybody can afford to buy "Gone With the
Wind" to screen at will and use as a doorstop.

Though fashions in clothes recur with the regularity of the tides, the manners,
language and expectations of the people who wear them are far different today
than in 1963. It used to be that four-letter words could shock simply by
appearing in print. A mother was a mom and not a euphemism. A small boy might
have reasonably assumed that, due to something in the water, only women in
France and Sweden grew bare breasts.

When the New York Film Festival set up shop, American movies were still paying
lip service to the puritanical notions in the old Production Code. Hollywood
film makers were doing their damnedest to find ways to get around the
prohibitions, sometimes brilliantly. But only in foreign movies could men and
women sleep together and even make love.

American movie critics used to rave about the cinematic genius of Carl Dreyer,
Satyajit Ray and Kurosawa, but the movies that kept the so-called art houses
open in 1963 were more likely to be sexy melodramas and comedies starring
Brigitte Bardot, Gina Lollobrigida and their spinoffs. In ideal circumstances,
the foreign-language art-house movie was both a work of some substance and a
frank approach to behavior not yet allowed in American films.

That American audiences were less interested in the art of foreign films than in
other kinds of display seems to be certified by the decline in film imports in
recent years. Once the American film was liberated in 1968, when the Code was
replaced by the rating system, Hollywood could match the yardage of naked flesh
from abroad, with the extra added attraction of explicit violence, which had
never much appealed to overseas movie makers.

For this reason, the New York Film Festival is probably of greater service today
than it was 30 years ago.  Along with the cavernous film palaces, the art houses
have gone, as well as the movies they used to show.  At Loew's 84th Street, you
aren't likely to stumble across the latest discovery from Iran or a film that,
according to the forthcoming festival's ad, "pushes even Romanian cynicism past
the limit."

It's been a busy 30 years of cinema at Lincoln Center: a total of nearly 800
movies, a continuum of other people's dreams, most of which are now forgotten.
It was a happy coincidence that the festival came into being at the time it did,
thus to be able to celebrate all but one of 10 great films that marked the
Golden Age of the incomparable Luis Bunuel. Only "Viridiana" (1962) came out too
soon.

Yet as vividly as I remember the hysterically deadpan delights of Bunuel's
"Exterminating Angel," the opening night attraction in 1963, I also
re-experience the lethargy inspired by Marguerite Duras's "Nathalie Granger" in
1972.

The lyrically surreal Bunuel comedy is about a group of dinner party guests who
find themselves mysteriously unable to leave their hosts at the end of the
evening. "Nathalie Granger" achieves the same effect through intentionally
inconsequential talk and minimal action. It paralyzes the will, which is not an
entirely unpleasant sensation. It's like going under anesthesia. One stares at
the exit sign to stay awake. The red letters lose their shape and sequence to
form the sinuous silhouettes of mythical beasts. The body's extremities tingle.
Sleep beckons ever more insistently. Then someone less susceptible, sitting
three rows away, stands up saying, "To hell with it," and stomps out. The spell
is broken.

As a writer, Duras creates narratives with prose that has been pared down to the
essentials. Her novels are spare, yet packed. She is a major artist and an
original voice. As such, her experiments in film command attention, though
writing and movie making don't really have much in common. Richard Roud, the
program director through the 1987 festival, gave her that attention, five times.

Taking such notice is one of the festival's continuing obligations, also met by
the showing of Norman Mailer's entertaining precinct improvisation, "Beyond the
Law," in 1968, and Susan Sontag's somewhat less gripping "Duet for Cannibals" in
1969. Occasionally these crossover attempts pay off handsomely, as they did in
1987 when the festival presented the playwright David Mamet's superb first film
as a writer-director, "House of Games."

My fondest memories of the New York festival are not of the hot tickets, such as
Bernardo Bertolucci's "Last Tango in Paris" in 1972 and Godard's "Hail Mary" in
1985 (when furious nuns formed picket lines at Lincoln Center), but of the
discovery of extraordinary films for which there was no hype, or for which the
advance word was dead wrong. I think especially of the afternoon in 1971 when I
arrived at Alice Tully Hall for the press screening of Terrence Malick's
"Badlands," about which I knew nothing.

As I was on my way into the auditorium, one of the festival aides waved at me
and said, making a pained expression, "I don't envy you this one." His wasn't a
lengthy review, but it was enough to throw me off course for about eight
minutes, after which it was apparent that we were watching the work of a new
film maker completely in control of his mind, manner and talent. "Badlands" is
not a nice movie. It's about a gun-crazy teen-age killer who briefly terrorizes
a large section of the country's heartland. It's also a deceptively
dispassionate portrait of an America in which actions seem magically to be
relieved of all consequences. Among other things, "Badlands" is a political
movie.

I think, too, of the way that Roud force-fed all of us on Godard in the early
years. Godard is irascible. He is an acquired taste, but he's also the most
original, innovative and seriously ambitious film maker of his generation. This
only became clear over the years in which Roud pushed our faces into "Bande a
Part" (1964), "Alphaville" (1965), "Two or Three Things I Know About Her" (1968)
and all of the others.

Most film makers would pawn birthrights to be able to please the public. Godard
has always been willing to infuriate and offend, lay audiences as well as nuns.
There was the night in 1972 when, as the curtain raiser for his latest feature.
"Tout Va Bien," with Jane Fonda, the festival showed "Letter to Jane," a
45-minute film in which Godard and his codirector, Jean-Pierre Gorin, ridicule a
news photograph of Fonda taken during a trip to North Vietnam.

The members of the audience became as angrily restless as I have ever seen them
at the festival. If it had been a 42d Street movie theater, it would have been
seat-slashing time. At Lincoln Center, some people walked out. Others stamped
feet and began to boo, though not because they were feeling sorry for Fonda, who
was, after all, the star of "Tout Va Bien." "Letter to Jane" is one of those
Godard efforts in which the screen often goes black for long periods of time,
when the same point is repeated more often than is absolutely necessary and when
the dialectic appears to devour itself, leading to total incoherence.

Without the New York festival, I'm not sure Godard would ever have been
recognized. In much the same way the festival supported Godard and Bunuel, it
kept the public's attention focused on Ray, Truffaut, Bertolucci, Fassbinder,
Maurice Pialat, Werner Herzog, Andrzej Wajda, Eric Rohmer and Krzysztof Zanussi.
These film makers were Roud's passions, a number of which came to be shared by
film aficionados who would otherwise have remained untouched.

It's still too early in the tenure of Richard Pena, who succeeded Roud as
program director, to identify the ways in which his personal biases will
influence and lead the members of the festival's selection committees.  There
has been an increasing number of films from Latin America and Asia in the last
several years, though whether this has to do with policy or availability is
anybody's guess. There also have been some notable discoveries since 1988,
Pena's first festival, particularly films by Aki Kaurismaki, Jane Campion and
Mike Leigh.

Yet there is the danger that, at 30, the festival will begin to slip into
comfortable, self-satisfied middle age, doing the correct political thing in its
selections while avoiding those films that can make audiences hoot with rage and
boo the way Godard's once did. Each year there are rumors about the worthy films
that did not get into the festival for one reason or another.

I'm haunted by one title in particular that never made it, Federico Fellini's
self-revealing "Intervista," made several years ago. It's a staged documentary
in which the maestro, accompanied by some Japanese journalists and Marcello
Mastroianni, more or less pushes his way into Anita Ekberg's house. According to
the film, Ekberg, who co-starred with Mastroianni in "La Dolce Vita," doesn't
want to be photographed. She doesn't like the way she looks -- she's put on
weight.

Fellini persists. The result is moving and funny and less unkind than it sounds.
It's also instant memorabilia, a footnote to some glorious cinema history. The
film was finally seen here earlier this year in a restrospective of Italian
films. "Intervista" would have been a natural for the festival. The Lincoln
Center Film Society honored Fellini at its annual gala in 1985. Its festival has
never shown a single Fellini film.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Andy Warhol's poster for the 1967 film festival. (Stacey P.
Morgan for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Bunuel's "Exterminating Angel," the
opening attraction in 1963 -- Hysterically deadpan delights. (pg 16)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Arms Makers: Rather Fight Than Switch

BYLINE: BY LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2900 words


In these hard times, no industry is laying off workers in greater numbers than
weapons manufacturers -- and much public rhetoric is now being devoted to
reversing this process through a policy called conversion. The idea is that
workers who produced tanks will be redeployed to make civilian products like
sewer pipes. But conversion is not happening. And it might never happen.

William A. Anders, chairman of General Dynamics, the giant manufacturer of M1
tanks, jet fighter planes and nuclear submarines, gave fair warning of this in a
little-noticed speech that has become the military industry's Gettysburg
Address. That speech, last Oct. 31 in St. Louis, is now widely cited by
chieftains of other big military contractors as a prudent call for a do-or-die
policy: make weapons or shut down.

It is not just that conversion cannot work, Mr. Anders said; it should not work.
Making plowshares is not so easy for a military contractor, and not as
profitable as simply making fewer swords. What contractors should do is lobby
for every military dollar that can be squeezed from Congress and the
Administration, and from foreign sales. And as the revenue flow inevitably
lessens in the post-cold war era, Mr. Anders told an industry conference,
weapons makers should shut factories and send home workers, eliminating
overcapacity and improving efficiency.

Paying Off Shareholders

"If we have cash that General Dynamics can't invest in good, attractive core
defense programs with decent returns," he said, then "rather than add
diversified volume [civilian products] just to look bigger, I believe we should
return excess cash to the shareholders."

General Dynamics, like other big military contractors, has made good on that
philosophy.  This summer the company laid out nearly $1 billion to buy back 30
percent of its outstanding shares, at premium prices. It has cut its work force
to 73,000 from 90,000 in 20 months, and capital investment is evaporating. "I
don't think we have a building under construction at our various sites, and
three or four years ago we constantly had several buildings under construction,"
said James Cunnane, chief financial officer at General Dynamics.

Similarly, throughout the military industry, factories stand empty or
half-empty, machinery is being auctioned and more than 300,000 jobs out of
roughly 3 million have been lost since the Berlin wall fell in 1989,
contributing mightily to the recession and the weak economy.

The blunt rejection of conversion -- in defiance of a policy endorsed by the
Bush Administration and by many state and local governments -- is a departure
from what happened during the three previous cutbacks in military spending since
World War II. The willingness to push into civilian production that existed in
the past has all but vanished, partly because attempts at conversion after the
Vietnam War failed. And even if military contractors were willing to depart from
the Anders manifesto and attempt such ventures, opportunities for making
consumer products are few in a weak economy.

Even so, perhaps a thousand military contractors -- a handful among the more
than 30,000 companies in the industry -- are attempting some civilian
production, according to the National Commission for Economic Conversion and
Disarmament, a Washington group. Some are giants, like Lockheed, the military
aircraft manufacturer, which now charges fees to commercial airlines to overhaul
or modify their aircraft. But most are small, like the Essex Corporation in St.
Louis, which makes oxygen equipment for military pilots and sells a modified
version to health care companies. These efforts have had little impact on the
enormous military industry, whose dozen or so major contractors and many small
businesses play a larger role in the economy than the auto industry and one
nearly as large as residential and commercial construction. By most estimates,
the meager conversion efforts to date have resulted in 50,000 to 100,000
civilian jobs.

The failure of the marketplace to provide more incentives for conversion puts a
huge burden on the Government to be the vehicle, at least temporarily. Even
those who prefer leaving conversion to the marketplace now lend backhanded
support to a Government role. "When defense spending is cut back, the market
economy releases resources -- particularly workers -- into the marketplace and
others bid for them, and that is fine," said Robert Hall, a Stanford University
economist. "The problem is that this is happening in a sick economy and that
puts a heavy burden on the job seekers."

Weapons or Highways?

Simply to protect the nation from prolonged hard times, the Government must
either maintain the industry, by continuing to spend money on weaponry, or pay
out those billions to redeploy workers in civilian projects. The civilian
endeavors most often mentioned include a national high-speed rail system,
highway and bridge repairs, job retraining and research to develop new products.

"For large-scale conversion to work, there has to be a shift from military
procurement and research into fixed public investment in infrastructure and
civilian research," said Greg Bischak, executive director of the commission for
economic conversion. "This doesn't mean every defense contractor will pursue
these opportunities. But history suggests that many of these contractors,
dependent as they are on Government spending, will follow the money."

Numerous Federal, state and municipal agencies are trying to promote conversion,
through job retraining and even grants to small companies to help with the cost
of reorganizing. But the total actually spent since 1990 is less than $50
million, according to the Center for Economic Conversion in Mountain View,
Calif.

Critics like Mr. Bischak say that much more must be done to get General
Dynamics, for example, to build, say, sewer pipes instead of tanks at its Lima,
Ohio, plant. An investment tax credit might work as an incentive to retool, he
said, along with the rechanneling of Government spending from military programs
to public works projects. The problem, others argue, is that the Government
would find itself favoring weapons makers in buying products already offered by
commercial companies.

The preference among weapons makers is for the money not to migrate from
military spending. Mr. Anders stressed this in his speech and executives at a
half-dozen other military companies agreed in interviews.

Freedom to Spend

One great concern is that starting next year, Congress will be free to channel
money from military spending into other programs. Under the 1990 deficit
reduction law, military savings cannot automatically be spent elsewhere, but the
restriction expires in 1993 "and that terrifies everyone in the defense
industry," said Sam F. Iacobellis, chief operating officer of Rockwell
International.

The industry is pushing for public acceptance of a post-cold war policy that
would keep military spending in the 1990's from falling below roughly $250
billion a year, in today's dollars. That would be down from the current $293
billion annual level. But it would mean the much-talked-of peace dividend would
be smaller than Mr. Bischak and others advocate.

"We have told our managers of weapons programs that their survival depends on
how well they can sell the customer," said Tom Culligan, a vice president at
McDonnell-Douglas, referring to the Pentagon and Congress. "And we have told our
officers to get in there and try to keep all our programs alive."

The case the industry is making for a substantial military industry is twofold:
The United States should remain the world's leader in high-tech weaponry and
also the world's guardian against small, aggressive nations like Iraq. National
security demands no less, this argument goes. Neither of the Presidential
candidates, George Bush and Bill Clinton, has challenged these goals.

The first goal, leadership in technology, means a steady stream of contracts to
develop state-of-the-art weapons systems. And in fact the Pentagon and Congress
have responded. Over the last two years, while other programs were cut sharply,
Pentagon spending for weapons development actually rose slightly, to $37.4
billion in the current fiscal year, in inflation-adjusted dollars.

Procurement is another matter. Protecting the world from the likes of Saddam
Hussein inevitably involves the Pentagon's buying quantities of Patriot
missiles, tanks, rifles and other materiel. And here the military industry has
suffered. Purchases have fallen nearly 22 percent, to $161.1 billion in
inflation-adjusted dollars in this fiscal year, from a high of $206 billion in
1987.

But sharply rising arms exports have partly offset the Pentagon cutback, and
President Bush has helped the process, authorizing two recent sales. Taiwan will
pay $4 billion for 150 F-16 fighters that General Dynamics will build in Fort
Worth, and Saudi Arabia will spend $5 billion for 72 F-15 jets that
McDonnell-Douglas is making in St. Louis. Mr. Bush and military industry
executives stressed that the sales would save jobs.

Saving jobs, in fact, has become a military industry weapon for opposing
spending cuts. Without conversion, the workers have nowhere to go. How to make
the most of this point was on the agenda at a luncheon in Washington this month
attended by executives from a half-dozen military contractors and organized by
the National Association of Manufacturers.

Rockwell was represented at the luncheon and later Mr. Iacobellis noted that
while Rockwell does engage in some conversion -- trying to sell a satellite
navigational device to boat owners, for example -- the number of workers
involved is small potatoes compared with Rockwell's military business.

"You cannot take the capacity that is in this country for defense and convert it
to commercial use; there is not nearly enough demand," particularly in a weak
economy, Mr. Iacobellis said. He added: "History will tell you we will not have
a peaceful world, and if defense technology is allowed to dry up, we will lose
our leadership in weaponry. We should take the so-called peace dividend and
spend it to develop high-tech weapons to keep our intellectual talent employed."

Many factors make military companies reluctant to convert. Having sold for
decades only to the Pentagon, they lack the expertise in sales and marketing to
crack commercial markets. Pentagon purchasing practices have fostered costly,
inefficient manufacturing operations. Engineers and workers, accustomed to these
inefficiencies, must be retrained for low-cost commercial operations. And making
weapons usually yields profit levels not easily achieved in the production of
cars, toys, airliners or appliances.

When conversion is attempted, frequently the product is an altered version of
what the Pentagon purchased and the new customer is another Government agency,
not a commercial buyer. "We know how to develop bids and contracts for
Government agencies; that environment is comfortable for us," said Allen Henry,
president of the Harris Corporation's Electronics Systems Sector, primarily a
military contractor.

Mr. Henry's division is selling a $1.7 billion air traffic control system to the
Federal Aviation Administration, drawing on technology used in
super-high-frequency military equipment. Lockheed, which makes Air Force cargo
and fighter planes, has a computer center that now processes parking tickets for
Los Angeles and other cities. And despite Mr. Anders's opposition to conversion,
some middle-level managers at a General Dynamics plant in San Diego have
proposed that the company adapt an imaging device that detects underground mines
so that cities can use it to rapidly locate water main leaks.

Even a conversion enthusiast like Richard Demmings proceeds cautiously, not
wanting to lose military business while trying to crack commercial markets. Mr.
Demmings is general manager of the ARO Corporation's life-support products
division in Buffalo. Ninety percent of the division's $10 million in annual
revenue is from the sale to the Air Force of oxygen equipment for pilots.

A Need to Go Slowly

But ARO now sells commercially a device that evolved from its technology, to
test the strength of seals on plastic packaging for sterilized medical tools.
Cracking the market meant training salespeople and designing a competitively
priced seal tester. More difficult, Mr. Demmings said, are week-to-week
decisions on how much to divert in resources and capital, at the risk of losing
military work.

"You have to inch your way along in commercial work," Mr. Demmings said, "or you
won't have the capital from defense revenues to convert."

Pentagon purchasing practices also discourage conversion. Defense spending cuts
and more emphasis on competitive bidding have made a dent in profits, but in
many cases the Pentagon covers a contractor's stated costs and adds a profit on
top -- a profit that commercial companies get only if consumers agree to pay a
high enough price. What's more, the Pentagon reimburses military contractors as
work proceeds, sometimes overpaying in the process.

Corporate America measures profitability chiefly by the return on its invested
capital. While nonmilitary industries must put up their own money for machinery
and other equipment, or borrow the money, the Government gives military
businesses a sizable sum for such investments. That has made the return on the
relatively small amount of invested capital from a contractor's own pocket a
healthy 20 percent or more, according to a General Accounting Office study in
the mid-1980's.

McDonnell-Douglas, afflicted today with cost overruns and write-offs in
developing the C-17 transport for the Air Force, says it anticipates a profit in
excess of $2 billion on $37 billion in sales, if the Pentagon goes through with
its plan to purchase 120 C-17's. That's a 20 percent annual return on the
company's $1 billion investment, assuming the planes are built and delivered
over 10 years.

"There is very little investment that is mandatory," said Paul Nisbet, an
analyst at Prudential Bache, "so the return has to be a good one."

Conversion wasn't always so unpopular. Weapons makers in World War II were
mostly civilian manufacturers like Chrysler and General Electric eager to get
back to commercial production to satisfy the huge postwar consumer demand.

The Boeing Example

The military industry, with its special relationship to the Pentagon, took root
in the Korean War, but after that war some big companies converted successfully.
The most notable example was Boeing Aircraft, which developed commercial jets.

After Vietnam, many military contractors, responding to steep cutbacks, switched
to civilian products, often failing. And that experience, cited by Mr. Anders in
his speech, has helped to make the industry gun-shy.

One frequently cited failure was Boeing Vertol's venture into the manufacture of
subway cars in addition to military helicopters. It failed in part because
Federal financing was cut for the Urban Mass Transit Administration, and the
Administration also failed to establish uniform standards that would have
allowed the same model to be mass produced for the various cities.

But for Lloyd Dumas, an expert on conversion at the Univerity of Texas at
Dallas, the Boeing Vertol failure only underscores Government's huge role in the
conversion process. "If there were a 10-year commitment to the development of a
high-speed rail system," Mr. Dumas said, "that would give Boeing Vertol the
assurance it needed to develop and make high-quality cars."



TINY BUDGETS FOR CHANGE

Across the nation, government agencies and commissions, many of them recently
formed, are trying to help military contractors -- and their laid-off workers --
make a transition to civilian life. But the effort is a meager one so far: less
than $50 million in government money has been spent since 1990, mostly on job
retraining and grants to help small companies reorganize.

The Defense Department's recently formed Defense Conversion Commission is still
holding hearings and preparing a report on what should be done. Congress has
appropriated $200 million for conversion work, and $1 billion more is embodied
in two bills under consideration. But in the absence of a clear-cut national
program, only about $20 million has been spent by Washington.

One reason so little has been done on the Federal level is that the Commerce,
Labor and Defense Departments are disputing which should play the major role,
said Brad Johnson, co-chairman of the New York Defense Advisory Panel.

Beyond Washington, many states and some cities have military conversion
commissions, but here too the spending has been scattered, amounting to not much
more than $20 million, according to Michael Closson, director of the Center for
Economic Conversion.

The New York panel, established by Gov. Mario Cuomo 18 months ago, is perhaps
the most prominent and certainly the biggest spender, having laid out about $10
million. Mostly with $50,000 or $60,000 grants, it has tried to wean small
companies from military work. The grants are catalysts, Mr. Johnson said, to
help retrain salespeople for the competitive commercial market, and to reshape
military technology into consumer products.


LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Greg Bischak says conversion can work. (Michael Geissinger for
The New York Times); William Anders says weapons, or nothing. (Bill Stover for
The New York Times) (pg. 6)

Drawing (pg. 1)

Chart: "Conversion Success Stories," lists a few military contractors who have
successfully switched to commercial production. (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dow Chemical's Cleanup Czar Unlocks the Gates

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1818 words

DATELINE: MIDLAND, Mich.


Four times a year, David T. Buzzelli, a vice president of the Dow Chemical
Company, prepares for a meeting that could have a major impact on the company's
operations. To get ready, he gathers information on manufacturing plans and
product offerings, including material the company considers confidential.

But this is no ordinary meeting of executives. Instead, Mr. Buzzelli will share
the company's plans with a panel of outsiders comprising Dow's Corporate
Environmental Advisory Council.

Inviting environmental advocates to examine the way it conducts business is
something new for Dow, which in the mid-1980's fought the Environmental
Protection Agency all the way to the Supreme Court to prevent airplane
inspections of its emissions. But it is typical of the things that have happened
since Mr. Buzzelli was named two years ago as the company's first corporate vice
president for environmental, health and safety matters.

Now, Dow has a program in place to cut its key toxic emissions in half by 1995.
Plant managers who once ignored anyone beyond the fence are forming community
advisory panels and inviting the neighbors in to see how things are done. And
the company has pledged -- at least in theory -- to phase out products and
applications that do not meet environmental standards.

Strong stuff for a company whose best-known product may still be the napalm it
produced during the Vietnam War. But Mr. Buzzelli insists that Dow, the nation's
second-largest chemical company after Du Pont and the maker of such best-selling
consumer products as Saran Wrap and Ziploc bags, has changed. The company's
future, he said, depends on how well it manages its environmental
responsibilities and how convincing its efforts are to the public.

"Environment issues are a key factor in the financial success of the company,"
he said. "This is not about altruism. We concluded that people who do not pay
attention to the environment will not be successful."

Not everyone is convinced Dow has gone completely green. Daniel J. Weiss, a
legislative affairs director of the Sierra Club, said Dow is a leading member of
the Chemical Manufacturers Association, which he said routinely lobbies against
laws aimed at reducing emissions. "The company's engineers have realized they
can save money by reducing pollution, but unfortunately that does not extend to
their policymakers," Mr. Weiss said. "They still use political money and their
contacts to block legislation."

But Manik Roy, a scientist with the Environmental Defense Fund, which is not a
member of the Dow advisory council, said the company's new openness is a step in
the right direction. "It's possible to work with these people, even if we do not
agree with everything they say," he said.

Environmental advocates are not compromised by their participation on panels
like the one at Dow, he said. "If nothing else, it never hurts to learn more
about what they are doing," Mr. Roy said.

The seven-member council includes Lee Thomas, a former administrator of the
E.P.A.; Joanna Underwood, president of Inform Inc., a New York-based
environmental research organization, and Anthony Cortese, dean of environmental
programs at Tufts University.

Whatever the true depth of Dow's commitment to the environment, Mr. Buzzelli
represents a new breed of environmental manager, students of industry say.

In the past, many companies dumped the job on a staff type with little influence
and no future. But Mr. Buzzelli was an important line manager, serving as
president of Dow Canada, when he was tapped in August 1990 for his current post.
"The stigma is gone," said Mr. Buzzelli, who now reports directly to Frank P.
Popoff, Dow's chief executive, and is a member of the company's top-level
management committee.

"In the old days, the environmental manager was the bearer of bad news, a
janitor with a tie," said J. Gary Taylor, publisher of the newsletter
Environmental Health & Safety Management. "But a guy like Dave Buzzelli has the
respect of line managers. He brings credibility to the job."

People like Mr. Buzzelli are showing up on the organization charts of many top
corporations, as the complexity and cost of meeting anti-pollution regulations
has risen and public concerns about environmental issues have been translated
into such laws as the Superfund and Clean Air acts. According to Arthur D.
Little, a consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass., 49 of the top 100 manufacturing
companies in the country had vice presidents in charge of environmental affairs
in 1991, up from 38 in 1990.

"Environmental stewardship is one of the biggest management challenges of the
1990's," said Stephen Poltorzycki, a director of Little's environmental
consulting operations. The job used to be part of manufacturing, added Ladd
Greeno, another consultant at Little. Now, he said, "it includes research and
development, sourcing, sales and marketing, community relations and stockholder
relations. The Dave Buzzellis are being asked to cut across many areas."

Indeed, Mr. Buzzelli says he is part executive and part pitchman, spending about
half his time on internal company affairs and the rest meeting with public
policy and environmental groups, giving interviews and making speeches. "The
first year I gave 50 speeches," he said. "Reaching out has a high priority."

It is a role well suited to Mr. Buzzelli, who is 51 years old. Although a
chemical engineer by background, he speaks glibly and without technical jargon.
Of medium height and balding, he is quick to smile and tries to put visitors at
ease with informality.

Mr. Buzzelli said Dow has long been concerned about the environment and
pollution issues, and points to its relatively small $26 million Superfund
liability as evidence. Other companies have liabilities amounting to hundreds of
millions of dollars to clean up chemicals and other wastes dumped over the
years.

"We established the first toxicology testing lab in history in 1935," Mr.
Buzzelli said. "We started a pollution prevention program in 1965 because it
made sense economically." Dow's Waste Reduction Always Pays, or WRAP, program,
adopted in 1986, is often cited by environmentalists as a good example of how
companies can save money by finding new uses for materials once discarded as
waste.

But Mr. Buzzelli admits that most of these efforts were undertaken at the
operating level, with little company-wide coordination. "E.H.S. was not very
well integrated," he said.

His job, he said, is to "bring together globally" all of Dow's environmental
undertakings. And his writ also includes looking at the company's line of
products and the uses to which they are put after being sold and how they are
ultimately disposed.

"My job is to integrate E.H.S. into the basic business strategy of the company,"
said Mr. Buzzelli, whose operations involve 2,600 of Dow's 62,000 employees. "We
want the business managers to take ownership of the issue. That is relatively
new for us."

Yet it is Mr. Buzzelli -- and fellow E.H.S. executives at other companies -- who
could wind up holding the bag if a major environmental disaster occurs.

Defense lawyers warn that recent anti-pollution legislation and sentencing
guidelines could make environmental managers the subject of criminal
prosecution, in effect the designated jailbird.

"With the advent of these guidelines, corporate management and employees in the
environmental area are for the first time truly at risk of going to jail," said
Paul G. Wallach of the Washington firm of Hale & Dorr in a paper prepared for an
environmental conference earlier this year.

Mr. Buzzelli said it is not something he spends much time worrying about. "I do
not focus on legal liability, personally," he said, adding that the company
conducts regular environmental audits and moves quickly to correct problems that
are uncovered.

Bringing in environmentalists to comment on the company's products and
operations has been a bracing exercise, Mr. Buzzelli admits, particularly for a
company that is a major producer of plastics. Plastic products and packaging
have been a special target of environmental advocates because they are usually
brightly colored and conspicuous, are typically used only for a short time and
endure for centuries after disposal.

Nevertheless, Mr. Buzzelli said the process has been useful. In a recent talk to
the Midland Rotary Club, Mr. Buzzelli said the Corporate Environmental Advisory
Council has had a "significant influence on the company. We are hearing things
we've never heard before."

The opportunity to get the ear of top management made joining the council
"utterly irresistible," said Ms. Underwood, president of Inform. Council
members, she said, "can request any information we want from the company,
including information it regards as confidential." While it is still too soon to
see much substantive change, she said, Dow appears to be making a good-faith
effort to listen.

Mr. Cortese, the dean at Tufts who is also on the council, agreed. He cited
"some pretty impressive discussions, not just with the E.H.S. people, but with
the ones who actually run the business."

He, too, said it is still too early to assess whether the company really has
embraced green values. "They still have a long way to go," he said, "but it is
very interesting to watch the transformation."


AUDITS ACROSS THE SEA

Environmental audits are becoming one of the major tools used by manufacturers
to insure compliance with the increasingly complex web of anti-pollution laws
and regulations.

At Dow, each operating unit undergoes a company-run audit every two years. Last
year, more than 120 audits were performed at Dow facilities worldwide, said
David T. Buzzelli, the company's vice president for environmental, health and
safety matters.

Like the financial audits they are patterned on, environmental audits compare a
facility's operations with company and regulatory standards. Mr. Buzzelli said
the audits are "very, very specific," measuring discharges of chemicals and
checking to see that a spill protection device is in place if one is required.

However, Mr. Buzzelli does not have a small army of auditors who sally forth
from Dow's headquarters in Midland, Mich., to check on the company's operations
in 33 countries. Instead, teams of line managers from one geographic unit go
into the plants of another unit to conduct the reviews. Americans, for example,
usually audit European plants.

The audits, which generally take about a week, are used at several levels. Local
managers are expected to correct any deficiencies that are uncovered. And senior
management uses them to make sure that local managers are moving quickly enough
to solve any problems.

"We have a long history of tight internal standards," Mr. Buzzelli said.
"Usually our internal standards are tighter than federal and state regulations."


NAME: David T. Buzzelli

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David T. Buzzelli, Dow's vice president for environment, health
and safety, at the company's incinerator in Midland, Mich. (Peter Yates for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hip-Hop's Hostile Takeover

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1253 words


QUINCY Jones is ecstatic, in a millionaire jazzman sort of way, about the news
that the Tower Records outlets on both coasts have sold out of thousands of
preview issues of a magazine he just founded.

Vibe, an oddly slick and gritty publication that is bankrolled by Time Inc., is
poised to enormously enlarge the already insistent voice of rap and hip-hop
music. If the magazine can find a broad enough readership, as its backers
certainly hope it will, Americans of all stripes may one day be deeply affected
by the urgency of hip-hop style and the brooding inner-urban attitude that is so
much a part of its culture.

At its most basic, hip-hop is a highly inventive, black-inspired, urban youth
cultural esthetic. It is expressed in a broad range of disciplines -- music,
dance, politics, the visual arts, humor and life style. At its core, hip-hop is
a brightly-colored yet edgey challenge to the status quo.

Vibe's mission, as Mr. Jones is fond of saying, is to be a "Rolling Stone for
the hip-hop generation."

And if the magazine's ultimate effect is to forever meld hip-hop's
counter-culture energy to the mainstream, then so be it, Mr. Jones said.

"It's going to happen anyway," he said without a note of dismay.

Last week, the same week that Vibe appeared on the newsstands, Donna Karan and
Calvin Klein, who are nothing if not mainstream designers, dressed models at
their shows in Timberline boots and baggy, drop-crotched jeans; some models at
Klein even wore their Calvins backwards, a direct swipe of the style popularized
less than a year ago by the junior high school rappers, Kris Kross. Donna Karan
even threw in a few hip-hop-attired kids for good measure.

"Isn't that what capitalism does?" asked Kennedy Fraser, a former fashion critic
for New Yorker magazine, somewhat rhetorically. "It takes a certain kind of
energy -- in this case a certain kind of rage -- packages and markets it and
makes it safe and sells it back."

She points out that an essential element of fashion is to reflect "what is going
on."

These days, she said, that appears to be the street culture of hip-hop. Its
appropriation is clearly not anything new.

The history of popular culture in America can be described as a long, seductive
dance between what society considers safe and respectful with that it also deems
mysteriously new, naughty and dangerous. Malcolm Cowley, chronicler of the
so-called "Lost Generation," recognized this dance almost 60 years ago.

When America's commerical interests needed a new domestic market early in the
century, it turned to tenents of the Boheminan sub-culture for an answer.

"Thus, self-expression and paganism encouraged a demand for all sorts of
products, modern furniture, beach pajamas, cosmetics, colored bathrooms with
toilet paper to match," Mr. Cowley wrote. "Living for the moment meant buying an
automobile, radio or house, using it now and paying for it tomorrow."

Greil Marcus, a pop culture critic who lives in Berkley, said the process Mr.
Cowley described is still with us today -- with key modifications.

Few, if any, who are part of contemporary America's sub- or counter-cultures are
interested in being starving artists.

"People are not interested in living a romantic, impoverished, Bohemian life,"
Mr. Marcus said. "They want to make money, the want to achieve a level of
society in which they can protect themselves."

"When it comes to the economics of culture," he said, "hip-hop musicians, in
general, are not fools."

The rapper Ice T., who is as controversial as he is authentic, is unapologetic
about being a millionaire with a big house on a hill and $70,000 sports cars.
Mr. Marcus calls Ice T.a capitalist-artist, emblematic of a legion of
hip-hoppers, many of whom are black and from impoverished neighborhoods, who, in
the language of the streets, just want to get paid.

The result, many agree, has been a quickening of the pace in which something
appears on Malcolm X Boulevard and then on Madison Avenue.

Russell Simmons, who at 34 years of age is a rap industry pioneer, said selling
out is exactly what the hip-hop generation wants to do.

"Black kids want to be sold out, as in there ain't no more records left, no more
tickets for your concert," said Mr. Simmons. "Black people like to see people
large. The more cars and houses and places rappers go, the badder they are.

"Being a starving artist," he said, "is not that cool in the ghetto."

Mr. Simmons, whose company, Rush Communications, handles a slew of rap and
hip-hot artists, was until two months ago Mr. Jones's partner at Vibe.

"I resigned," Mr. Simmons said, adding that he remains good friends with Mr.
Jones and wishes him success.

He also said that he believed the magazine's staff seemed out of tune with
hip-hop sensibilities. An example, he offered, is the fact that Jonathan Van
Meter, the editor in chief, is gay, something he has openly discussed with
critics.

"I don't think that makes me homophobic to say that," Mr. Simmons said. "I just
think that the most homophobic group invading popular culture in the last 50
years are probably rappers. I would like to see some straight black man involved
in the editing of this magazine, someone whose experiences are similar to that
of the rappers."

He said his departure from the magazine was hastened by what he perceived to be
the publication's direction. He characterized Vibe, produced by a mostly black
editorial staff , as an "outsider's magazine."

Mr. Van Meter does not share Mr. Simmons' assement of his magazine.

"It is a strong, black music culture magazine," he said, "essentially conceived
of for everyone who likes the music -- black, white, Asian, Latino or female."

"It has to be true to hip-hop and true to journalism," he said.

But others, like James Bernard, a columnist and senior editor of the Source, a
much grittier hip-hop publication than Vibe, is worried about Time Inc. and
other powerful corporations of its kind trying to enter the inner world of
hip-hop.

"They are the ones who pressured Ice T. to pull "Cop Killer," said Mr. Bernard,
referring to the rapper's decision not to have the controversial heavy metal
released on his latest CD. "This is a corporation that almost spearheaded the
neutering of rap and here they are trying to be an organ for it at the same
time."

"Hip-hop is where so many people are finding meaning in their lives," he
continued. "I don't think it's fair to mess around with this."

Jann S. Wenner, editor and publisher of Rolling Stone, said that he, unlike some
rock and hip-hop purists, is not disturbed when the counter-culture becomes part
of the mainstream.

"Now we are the mainstream," he said of his baby boom generation. "We are the
biggest part of the population, the best educated, coming into our most
prosperous years."

Unlike the parents and community leaders of the 1950's that long resisted rock
and roll, the arbitors of contemporary American taste were more likely shaped by
the Rolling Stones and Vietnam. As a result, he suggested, the post-World War II
generation is a much more open-minded about change than previous generations.

"Today, society is much more loosened up," said Mr. Wenner, who founded Rolling
Stone a quarter of a century ago.

He added: "There's not this brick wall anymore."

But from the pages of Vibe comes a different, darker perspective expressed in
the lyrics of a hip-hop song by Naughty by Nature:

If you ain't never been to the ghetto

Don't ever come to the ghetto!

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vibe's mission, says Quincy Jones, is to be a "Rolling Stone
for the hip-hop generation." And if that means hip-hop becomes mainstream, so be
it. At the Calvin Klein show, a model wore her Calvin's backward, like the
rappers Kris Kross. An essential element of fashion is to reflect "what is going
on," said Kennedy Fraser, the former fashion critic of The New Yorker. At Donna
Karan's show last week, she put a few children into hip-hop gear. (Kim
Garnick/The New York Times)(pg. 1); Quincy Jones wants Vibe to be a home for the
hip-hop sensibility. (Lee Crum/Outline); The staff of Vibe, left to right: Diane
Cardwell, Jonathan Van Meter, Scott Poulson-Bryant, Emil Wilbekin and Stefan C.
Campbell. (Jeff Weiner for The New York Times)(pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
The Favors Done for Quayle: A New Look at Guard Stint

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK with JEFF GERTH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3020 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS


At a time when the Republicans are stressing military records as a campaign
issue, a re-examination of Vice President Dan Quayle's enlistment in the Indiana
National Guard shows a striking pattern of favoritism and raises new questions
about the fairness of the enlistment practices for the elite unit that saved him
from the draft.

Twenty-three years ago, when thousands of young men trying to escape service in
Vietnam were placed on waiting lists for the National Guard, Mr. Quayle avoided
those long lists and secured a coveted spot in the Indiana Guard because he was
directed to the headquarters unit, where openings were largely unavailable to
those without special connections, knowledge or qualifications.

In 1988, Mr. Quayle acknowledged that he asked a former Guard official to help
him gain entry into the Guard. But it had never been clearly established before
now that his unit doled out enlistment slots to some men while turning others
away -- at a time when Washington had ordered all Guard units across the nation
to enlist men on a first-come, first-served basis.

Just after George Bush chose him as his Vice-Presidential candidate in 1988, Mr.
Quayle argued that the telephone call made on his behalf by a retired Guard
general, an employee of his grandfather's newspaper, ultimately had little
impact on his ability to join the Guard because his unit, in Indianapolis, had a
number of vacancies.

That argument quickly defused what had been a mushrooming controversy. Mr.
Quayle has been bothered by few questions about the matter since, and now he is
leading the Bush campaign's assault on Gov. Bill Clinton's draft record.

But a look back at the questions raised in 1988, an inquiry initiated by The New
York Times as part of its continuing exploration of the national candidates'
careers and records, makes clear that the explanation by Mr. Quayle and his
supporters does not tell the whole story.

The unit in which Mr. Quayle enlisted did not appear to be operating on a
first-come, first-served basis, according to interviews with Indiana National
Guard officers, enlisted men and others who were turned away from the Guard.
Several months before Mr. Quayle joined the Guard, Washington had ordered Guard
units nationwide to fill vacancies with the first person who applied, if there
was no waiting list, or from the top of the waiting list, if the unit had one.

When Mr. Quayle enlisted in May 1969, the Indiana National Guard had waiting
lists that probably numbered in the thousands, according to officials involved
with recruiting at that time. Nationally, the Guard had more than 100,000 men on
waiting lists.

It is impossible to know precisely how long the waiting lists were for the
Indiana Army National Guard when Mr. Quayle enlisted on May 19, 1969. The lists
were kept casually by unit commanders in each of the state's 90 units, and most
records were destroyed years ago. But in interviews, several former guardsmen
and others who sought enlistment at the time all recalled that the lists were
forbidding.

The Department of Defense at that time had established strict rules to end
racial discrimination in recruiting in the South and illegal trafficking in
coveted Guard slots elsewhere.

More than 30 interviews and an examination of records by The New York Times
found that Mr. Quayle's family connections were crucial because, without them,
Mr. Quayle probably would not have discovered the headquarters unit and its
vacancies.

Former Indiana Guard officials acknowledged, in 1988 and recently, that they
looked for particularly intelligent and presentable people for the headquarters
unit. But The Times inquiry indicated that special connections were often the
most important factor.

Asked to comment, David C. Beckwith, Mr. Quayle's spokesman, said: "Despite
heroic efforts, The Times has failed to find anything new or different from what
journalists discovered in 1988: there were dozens of openings in the Indiana
National Guard in spring 1969, and family influence was not used in securing
one. Dan Quayle fulfilled his military obligation even while Bill Clinton was
seeking to evade service. Dan Quayle was doing his basic training at Fort Bragg
even while Bill Clinton was organizing anti-U.S. demonstrations in England. Dan
Quayle has freely and truthfully answered every question put to him, while Bill
Clinton has contradicted himself, dissembled, and run from the press."

No Room in Unit, Some Were Told

In recent interviews, several Indianans with qualifications similar to Mr.
Quayle's said they found hopeless waits in conventional Guard units in
Indianapolis and elsewhere in the state that year and were never told of the
openings in the Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment unit, the
administrative unit for the entire Indiana National Guard.

One such man, Edward W. Najam Jr., said he applied for admission in a visit to
the headquarters unit offices in August 1969 -- a time when Guard records showed
a small number of vacancies. Mr. Najam, now a lawyer in Bloomington, Ind., had
just graduated from Indiana University, where he was the student body president.
He had been accepted at Harvard Law School, though he was in clear jeopardy of
being drafted before he could enroll.

But Guard recruiting officers did not tell Mr. Najam there were openings, and he
was turned away.

"There wasn't a space for me; there's no doubt about it because I would have
grabbed it in a minute," he recalled recently. (As it turned out, Mr. Najam
said, he was ultimately rejected for military service for medical reasons.)

In addition, a number of Mr. Quayle's former colleagues in the Indiana Guard
said that they, like Mr. Quayle, managed to circumvent the waiting lists only
because they were steered to the headquarters unit by either a family connection
or a well-placed phone call to someone already in the Guard.

In one such case, Samuel D. Weldy 3d, who is now a lawyer in Bluffton, Ind.,
said he got into the unit because his father, a 20-year Guard veteran, called
Col. Alfred F. Ahner, the same Guard official who found a spot in the
headquarters unit for Mr. Quayle. Mr. Ahner, who lives in Indianapolis, is now a
retired major general.

"The openings there were probably not as well publicized or as readily available
to the public as in other units," Mr. Weldy said. "I got accepted, just like
Quayle I assume, because my father called Ahner. The fact of the matter is they
had openings. But I don't think there's any question that to learn about this
kind of unit you would have had to had some kind of connection."

Guard Was Pressed On Recruiting

All of this occurred when the National Guard had imposed a nationwide
first-come, first-served recruiting policy. According to minutes of the 1968
convention of the National Guard Association, the policy was a response to
pressure from the Johnson Administration, which was concerned about the small
numbers of minority guardsmen.

Maj. General Winston P. Wilson, the chief of the National Guard Bureau, told the
convention in 1968: "The basis of it was the Department of Defense determination
that we in the Guard were discriminating between black and white. Therefore, the
waiting list was put in, and the applicants first-come, first-served, would be
taken and that's still in effect at the present time." (In 1969, 1.26 percent of
guardsmen nationwide were black.)

In October 1969, the issue was discussed again at the association's convention.
At that point, General Wilson reported that the Army and Air National Guards,
with a combined membership of 464,000, had a nationwide waiting list of 116,000.

Recently, when Maj. Robert W. Dunlap, a National Guard Bureau spokesman, was
asked to provide any further documents or information the Pentagon might have
about the Vietnam-era recruiting policies for the Guard, he did not find
anything.

In 1988, Mr. Quayle's record of military service, and his awkward handling of
questions about it, was considered a serious political liability. Four years
later, Bush-Quayle campaign officials apparently feel so comfortable with Mr.
Quayle's record that they have used it pointedly to draw contrasts with Governor
Clinton's efforts to avoid the draft.

In fact, it has been Mr. Quayle -- far more than President Bush -- who has been
most willing to assail Mr. Clinton directly on the draft issue.

"I wore the uniform for six years," Mr. Quayle said in an interview on the last
day of the Republican National Convention. "I chose to serve my country. Bill
Clinton chose not to. It's a major difference between Bill Clinton and myself.
Joining the National Guard was a very honorable decision."

In a recent speech to a National Guard Association convention in Salt Lake City,
Mr. Bush said: "No candidate has ever been attacked more unmercifully than Vice
President Quayle. But he stood his ground. And he answered every question calmly
and with candor. And this is service to country."

In May 1969, when Mr. Quayle graduated from DePauw University, American
servicemen were dying in Southeast Asia at the rate of 39 a day. For the nearly
27 million men who came of draft age during the period, there were innumerable
ways to avoid the draft, some legal, some not. In their book "Chance and
Circumstance: The Draft, The War and The Vietnam Generation," Lawrence M. Baskir
and William A. Strauss told how men feigned homosexuality, committed crimes or
sliced off fingers to gain exemptions.

One of the most popular vehicles, for those who could afford it, was the college
and graduate school deferment. But as the war escalated, and the need for troops
grew, the Government canceled the deferment for most graduate students starting
in 1968. That left Mr. Quayle's undergraduate class of '69 subject to the draft
almost as soon as its members finished school. Mr. Clinton, who graduated from
Georgetown a year earlier, faced the same problem.

Men of draft age could fulfill their obligation with a six-year hitch in the
National Guard or reserves. Members of the Guard and reserves typically spent
about six months on active duty and served out the remainder of their six-year
hitches by attending several meetings, or one weekend, each month and a two-week
camp each summer.  Only 37,000 of the 1.04 million men in the Guard and reserves
during the war were mobilized, and only 15,000 were sent to Vietnam.

Because of their relative safety, openings in the Guard and reserves were so
coveted that eager young men often drove through several states, stopping at
armories in town after town to place their names on waiting lists. In June 1969,
a month after Mr. Quayle enlisted, a civilian employee at Fort Benjamin Harrison
near Indianapolis was charged with soliciting a $250 bribe from a man seeking to
enlist in an Army Reserve unit.

Retired Capt. John J. Svabik Jr., who was a battalion administrative officer for
the Guard in Gary, said he remembered that the units in Gary regularly had
waiting lists of as many as 1,000 men for about 900 slots.

"We maintained waiting lists right up until the time the draft was eliminated,"
he said.

Existing records tell conflicting stories about whether the Guard was over- or
under-staffed. A June 30, 1969, annual report filed by John N. Owens, then
adjutant general of the Indiana Guard, showed that the Guard had 10,255 men, 52
more than it was authorized to have by the Pentagon. But statistics supplied by
the National Guard Bureau, an arm of the Defense Department, show that the
Indiana Guard had been over strength through October 1968 and then was
consistently under strength, usually by a few dozen men, through July 1969.

A Safe Refuge From Combat Duty

At the same time, Guard records clearly show that the headquarters unit was
consistently below its authorized strength. On the day before Mr. Quayle
enlisted as a buck private, the records show, the unit was authorized to have 63
enlisted men but had only 52, even with long waiting lists across the state.

By most accounts, the unit was the safest place in the Indiana National Guard.
Because it was an administrative unit, it could not be deployed to Vietnam. "It
would be a prime unit to get in if you wanted to avoid combat duty," said
retired Master Sgt. Orval L. Huskisson, who spent a number of years in the
headquarters unit.

Nine months after he joined the Guard, and one month after he returned from
training in North Carolina and Maryland, Mr. Quayle transferred out of the
headquarters unit and into the 120th Public Information Detachment, where he
wrote press releases and worked on a Guard magazine. That unit could have been
deployed to Vietnam.

Mr. Quayle said in 1988 that he sought enlistment in the Guard because he wanted
to go to law school after graduating from DePauw. He got in with the help of
retired Maj. Gen. Wendell C. Phillippi, a former Indiana Guard commander who was
working as managing editor of The Indianapolis News. The paper's publisher at
the time was Eugene C. Pulliam, Mr. Quayle's maternal grandfather. The Pulliam
family still owns a majority interest in the newspaper.

"Danny called me up and said he wanted to talk to me about National Guard
enlistment, and he called up and I said I'd be glad to," General Phillippi said
in 1988. "I called the adjutant general's office and asked if they had a place
for a Dan Quayle, who's a fine young man, and he went out there."

General Phillippi chose to call a longtime friend, Alfred Ahner, then a colonel
and a top officer at the headquarters unit.

"I went to the personnel section and checked, and they had some vacancies,"
General Ahner said in 1988. "So I asked them to hold one for an individual that
General Phillippi was recommending sending over. I wanted to be sure they didn't
go ahead and recruit somebody in before he got there and had a chance to present
himself. We were pretty selective in who we let in. We tried to determine that
they had some degree of intelligence."

In a recent interview, General Owens said "there was nothing wrong" with Mr.
Quayle's seeking help from General Ahner. In the Guard at that time, he
explained, "It's not what you know, it's who you know."

Despite the first-come, first-served policy that Washington ordered the states
to observe on Guard enlistments, headquarters unit officials from that era
suggested that they used significant discretion in deciding whom to enlist.
Retired Col. Robert T. Fischer, the director of the Indiana Guard's military
history project, said that connections were not needed but that a presentable
image sometimes was.

"Headquarters detachment just didn't take every turkey off the street," he said.
"It was where the general was, and there were some of those guys they just
didn't want. If they walk in the door and he looks like a dog and has hair down
to here, you send them to another unit. When some trash bag came in the door,
there were ways around these things without breaking any rules."

Regarding Mr. Quayle, Colonel Fischer said: "Here's a kid who walks in, he's got
a haircut, he said 'Sir,' he passed the test, he was smart enough to fill out
the application. He just presented a good appearance."

Connections Helped, As Did Haircuts

Former Guard officials do not dispute the notion that the vacancies in the
headquarters unit were not advertised, and that recruiters in local armories did
not always look elsewhere for vacancies if their units were full.

"We did not have advertising money to say there are vacancies," said General
Owens. "They'd have to call the headquarters, talk to the personnel officer and
say, 'Where are there vacancies?' "

But often that did not happen. Clark L. Snyder, now a lawyer with Indiana Power
and Light in Indianapolis, said he tried to enlist at an armory on the city's
west side in 1969 after he graduated from Indiana University. He said he
received a form letter saying he had been placed on a waiting list.

"I was under the firm belief that there were no vacancies anywhere I could have
qualified," he said. "My recollection is that it didn't hurt to know someone. I
didn't have the general knowledge to know where openings were."

In the fall of 1970, when Guard records show there were still vacancies in the
headquarters unit, Bernard L. Pylitt, who attended law school with Mr. Quayle at
Indiana University in Indianapolis, made telephone inquiries about joining the
Guard and was told there were no openings in Indianapolis.

"I called the number in the phone book," he said. "I asked, 'Is there a
recruiter I can talk to?' They said, 'No.' I didn't call every unit in the
state. I didn't know you could do that. I didn't know enough. My dad was just a
shoe salesman. Our family didn't have the savvy, the exposure to make the right
phone calls."

'You Had to Know The Right People'

Many of those who enlisted in the unit around the time Mr. Quayle did said they
succeeded only with help.

John E. Hungate, who now lives in St. Paul, Ind., said a friend who was a
lieutenant in the Guard found an automobile mechanic's job for him in the unit
in December 1968.

"He just talked to some people up there, and they had an opening and they called
me up," he said. "I couldn't believe it. You had to know the right people, I
guess."

Stephen W. Morell, now a truck driver in Marengo, Ind., said he applied for a
number of units around the state in the spring of 1969, but got into the
headquarters unit with the help of a recommendation from his brother, a cook in
the unit. He had to wait several months but eventually received a call.

And Larry A. Myers, now president of Summit Bank of Marion, Ind., said he
started searching for a spot in the Guard in the spring of 1969, shortly before
he graduated from Indiana University. He said he applied at the armory in Marion
without success, but that the colonel there, whom he knew, had the interest and
diligence to search for a position at the headquarters unit.

"Next thing I know, I was called up," he said. "I could have had a guy who
didn't care, and I would have been in Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dan Quayle, left, in 1971 with a fellow National Guardsman, Bob
Basler, at Camp Atterbury, Ind. (Associated Press) (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Long Shadow of the M.I.A.'s Still Stalks a Pentagon Official

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


Nearly 20 years after American troops came home from Vietnam, Roger E. Shields,
the Pentagon official in charge of accounting for those who did not return, is
still haunted by accusations that the Nixon Administration knowingly left
servicemen behind. He is also pained, he says, to see himself quoted as the
official who in effect wrote off all the missing as dead.

Mr. Shields, who was Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs in 1973, when United States forces were withdrawn from Vietnam, says
that Americans will probably never know how many soldiers were alive in
Indochina when a prisoner exchange with Hanoi ended that year.

Next week, he will join an array of high-level Nixon Administration officials
called to testify before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs
about what they knew at the time of Americans reported as missing in southeast
Asia.

On Monday, the committee will question, among others, Melvin R. Laird, Secretary
of Defense from 1969-1973; William P. Rogers, Secretary of State in the same
years; Vernon A. Walters, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, 1972-76, and
Alexander M. Haig, Jr., White House Chief of Staff in 1973-74.

On Tuesday, the committee will devote a full day to Henry A. Kissinger, who was
President Richard M. Nixon's national security adviser in 1973. On Thursday, Mr.
Shields is due to appear, along with others.

Pentagon View Misinterpreted

In two recent interviews, Mr. Shields said that the Pentagon, contrary to
popular belief, never declared that all Americans unaccounted for in prisoner
exchanges were dead. He asserted that the Senate committee has used a statement
he made on April 12, 1973, out of context.

On that day, Mr. Shields stated in the course of a lengthy news conference: "We
have no indications at this time that there are any Americans alive in
Indochina."

Two weeks earlier, President Nixon had said in a television address to the
nation that "all our American P.O.W.s are on their way home." Mr. Shields said
neither he nor the Pentagon were making that claim, nor were they saying that
any Americans who did not return must have perished.

"What the Defense Department was saying in '73 is not that they were all dead,
but that we don't have specific information that that they were alive," Mr.
Shields said in New York, where he now works in banking. He left government
service in 1977.

"I've spent a large part of my life and put a lot of emotion into this," he
said. "It was such an enormous issue and we were dealing with human beings. I
knew their wives; I knew their sisters; I knew their brothers." Though he is
years away from direct involvement, Mr. Shields said that he is still invited to
weddings and other family events by relatives of the missing.

"This is why I get so frustrated at being cited saying that they are all dead,"
he said.

Respect of Families

Dolores Apodaca Alfond, head of the National Alliances of Families, which
represents relatives of service personnel missing from all wars, said Mr.
Shields had won wide respect.

"Many family members I know appreciated the fact that when they asked questions,
he told them the truth," she said.

In the interviews, Mr. Shields said all that was known in 1973 was that some
Americans who survived the shooting down of planes or other incidents had not
been returned or accounted for by Hanoi, the Viet Cong, the Khmer Rouge in
Cambodia or the Pathet Lao, the Communist movement now in power in Laos.

"I'd say we expected 30 or 40 more people to come home, maybe up to 50-51," Mr.
Shields said. He said he shares the view of many who have worked on the issue
that Vietnam knew more than it revealed about the fate of at least some of those
Americans, and therefore must take some of the responsibility for keeping a
lobby of angry families active for more than 20 years.

"Based on my experience, I felt there had been less than complete candor all
along from the Vietnamese and Lao," he said.

Stories From Prisoners

Over the years, lists and suspicions grew as Indochinese refugees began to tell
stories of captive Americans.

In the summer of 1973, a few months after the end of the prisoner exchange known
as Operation Homecoming, Mr. Kissinger presented Hanoi with a list of 80 names
on which more information was sought. Mr. Shields said the list included some
names the Pentagon was sure Hanoi knew something about, plus a few other cases
they could not possibly have accounted for as a "control group." But Hanoi never
replied, so the test turned out to be useless.

Mr. Shields also said that documents from the period now being released under an
executive order by President Bush should be dealt with cautiously. In
particular, he discounted a memorandum, signed by Lawrence S. Eagleburger,
currently the Acting Secretary of State, who was an Assistant Secretary of
Defense at the time. The memo mentioned an unknown number of Americans left in
captivity in Laos -- up to 350 servicemen and civilians, according to the
Defense Intelligence Agency.

The memo, passed on to Mr. Kissinger by Defense Secretary Elliot L. Richardson,
was written not by Mr. Eagleburger but by Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, former desk
officer for Laos in the Defense Department and C.I.A., Mr. Shields said. Mr.
Secord, the former major general who later played a pivotal role in the
Iran-contra affair, was then on Mr. Eagleburger's staff.

Pressuring Laos

"Eagleburger had just been thrown into this thing at a critical time," Mr.
Shields said. "The feeling was that Eagleburger had this memo given to him to
sign to say we have to do something to make them perform. We had to hold the Lao
responsible."

Lists and Numbers

The United States lists 2,266 Americans as unaccounted for in Indochina, more
than half of whom are assumed to have died but whose bodies have not been found.
Some were lost over water and will never be recovered.

Officials have narrowed the list of those whose cases they believe Hanoi can
resolve to 135. Seventeen years after the fall of Saigon ended the war in 1975,
the issue stills blocks United States recognition of Hanoi and the lifting of a
trade embargo.

Mr. Shields does not like lists and numbers.

"We may never know if we left people behind," he said. "And if we find out that
we did, we may never know that the list is complete." "

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Roger E. Shields will testify Thursday before the Senate
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Schwarzkopf Criticizes Clinton on the Draft

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


The nation's most recent military hero, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, and the
Republican leader in the Senate, Bob Dole, both suggested today that Gov. Bill
Clinton's efforts to avoid the Vietnam draft in 1969 would prove to be a problem
for him.

General Schwarzkopf, who directed military operations in the Persian Gulf war,
said Mr. Clinton's draft record could be a problem if he won the Presidency.

"How does a person who admits that he deliberately did not agree with the war,
and therefore did not want to go to that war, how does he handle it when he has
to send other people to war?" General Schwarzkopf said in an interview with AP
Network News and Newsweek.

"What's he going to do about the people who don't want to go to that particular
war? This is a question that I think needs to be answered by the candidate
himself. And there's a lot of other questions along those lines that are in my
mind," he said.

Senator Dole, of Kansas, called a news conference to declare that for Mr.
Clinton, the draft controversy would prove to be "the Achilles heel that will
end his political ambitions."

Mr. Dole said he called the news conference at the request of the Bush campaign.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
CLINTON EXPANDS POSITION ON DRAFT

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Sept. 19


Gov. Bill Clinton acknowledged today that he might have received special
treatment in 1969 from Federal and local officials in his ultimately successful
effort to avoid the Vietnam War draft.

Mr. Clinton said in a question-and-answer session with reporters that his
decision to seek help from the office of Senator J. W. Fulbright of Arkansas in
1969 was part of an effort to get information about his options involving
military. But he said the favors he may have received had been the result of
loopholes in a faulty Selective Service system, not of pressure he was able to
exert on politicians and others he knew. Mr. Clinton made his remarks at a news
conference called to announce his endorsement by Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., who
served as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Presidents Reagan and
Bush until 1989.

"The problem is, when people ask you about special treatment, they mean did you
leverage money or power or something to get something that other people wouldn't
have gotten," Mr. Clinton said. "And the answer to that is no.

"But the truth is that the rules themselves wrote in special treatment," he
said. "And I have to say that's right. If you go back and look at who got
deferments and why, and how they worked and how people with education were
favored over people without, there was a system I think that plainly favored
people who were well educated and had options that they could pursue that others
didn't."

If a Draft Was Reinstated

Mr. Clinton said that if a draft system was ever to be reinstated, there should
be fewer exceptions allowed than there were then.

Mr. Clinton, the Democratic nominee for President, has always maintained that he
received "no unusual or favorable treatment" as a 23-year-old Rhodes scholar
when he was trying to avoid serving in Vietnam. But others involved in the draft
process at the time have said Mr. Clinton worked actively to shield himself from
the draft by first signing up for a Reserve Officers Training Corps program and
then re-entering the draft system after much of the danger of being called for
service had abated.

Admiral Crowe termed the questions about Mr. Clinton's draft status "divisive
and peripheral" and said he had decided to announce his support for the Arkansas
Governor because the nation should turn its attentions to domestic matters in
the aftermath of the cold war. "This election is primarily about the future," he
said.

Faulty Logic in Politics

Admiral Crowe, who said he had talked to Mr. Clinton about military affairs for
weeks but had agreed to participate in today's news conference only a few days
ago as the draft issue heated up once again, defended Mr. Clinton's lack of
military service. He said that the amount of attention paid to the draft issue
was an example of how the political process had "a tendency to take flimsy
evidence and reach grand conclusions."

Mr. Clinton and his aides said there was no connection between Mr. Crowe's
decision to speak on Mr. Clinton's behalf today and the campaign's desire to get
past the draft issue. But nearly every member of Mr. Clinton's senior campaign
hierarchy was on hand for today's announcement, watching just out of camera
range.

"I would hope that Admiral Crowe's statement will influence the debate on this,"
Mr. Clinton said. "But more importantly, I would hope that what he said about
focusing on the issues of the future will be the dominant themes of the coming
campaign."

Clinton campaign officials have worked to minimize the draft issue as
Republicans have seized on Mr. Clinton's varying explanations as evidence that
he has a problem with credibility. Mr. Clinton has frequently ignored questions
on the matter.

Talking to Many People

"When I had to make arrangements about the service, I had to talk to a lot of
people, including them," Mr. Clinton said of his contact with Senator
Fulbright's office. "I never asked them for any special treatment. I tried to
find out what my options were. I think that is what they have said all along
throughout this campaign."

A document in the Fulbright archives at the University of Arkansas published in
The New York Times today suggests that in July 1969 the Senator's top aide
discussed Mr. Clinton's request to join the training program with Army officials
and was familiar with the details of the arrangement Mr. Clinton was seeking.

Clinton campaign officials have said only reporters and the Republican
opposition are preoccupied with the draft issue. They have tried to lay the
issue to rest several times in recent weeks. Mr. Clinton said he was approached
repeatedly on his trip this week to Western states by Vietnam veterans who said
they would support him.

"People will have to make their own judgments and the press will have to make
its own judgment," he said. "But I clearly think that Admiral Crowe has made a
very important statement."

Admiral Crowe, who is 67 years old, added: "One of the things about being my age
is, you discover you want to be judged on your life and not on when you were 23
years old. And some of the things I did when I was 23, I prefer not to
remember."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton received the endorsement yesterday of Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Presidents
Reagan and Bush, at a news conference in Little Rock, Ark. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
In Their Own Words

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 380 words



SENATOR AL GORE

In a speech yesterday at a beach clean-up rally in Sandy Hook, N.J.

"Mahatma Ghandi once said we must become the change we wish to see in the world.
If we want to see a cleaner environment in this world, we have to participate
actively in cleaning up the environment. You are doing that here today and
people like you are doing it in beachfront areas all over the country. And also
now in foreign countries. It is a worldwide event, and I want to congratulate
you for it.

Now ladies and gentlemen, if we want to see the protection of the environment
and the creation of millions of new jobs in the process of leading the
environmental revolution, we have to become that change also. We have to become
involved in the political process. If you want to see a cleaner beach, you not
only talk about it, you come out here and you personally take the litter and the
garbage and the waste off of the beach and recycle it and put it where it should
be. If you want to see leadership in the White House in favor of protecting the
environment, you personally have to do it by registering to vote and persuading
others to vote and getting Bush and Quayle out of the White House.

This is beach clean-up day. November 3 is going to be White House clean-out day.
"

VICE PRESIDENT DAN QUAYLE

From a speech yesterday at the Akron-Canton Regional Airport en route to a rally
in Ravenna, Ohio.

" I'm not going to kid anyone. Things are challenging. They're difficult. By
electing our opponent, they will raise taxes, creating bigger government that
will only make matters worse. In the press today there's another story about
Bill Clinton and how he avoided military service. Let me be very clear on this.
Bill Clinton can run, he can dodge, but he can't hide the truth from the
American people. Sooner or later, Bill Clinton is going to have to come clean
with the American people on how he avoided military service. It is in his
interest, and obviously it's in all the American people's interest, to have all
the facts. The people from Ohio, coming from the Midwest, they want somebody
they can trust. They want a President that's going to level with them. They want
a President that is going to put all the facts on the table and tell the truth."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Vice President;
Quayle Attacks Clinton on Draft and Is Heckled at a Rally in Ohio

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: RAVENNA, Ohio, Sept. 19


Vice President Dan Quayle today renewed his attacks on Gov. Bill Clinton for
avoiding the draft, and a few moments later was heckled and taunted for 20
minutes as he tried to speak at a campaign rally here.

Swinging through a state that has become pivotal for the re-election prospects
of Mr. Quayle and President Bush, the Vice President went out of way to keep
alive the debate over Mr.  Clinton's efforts to steer clear of the draft in
1969.

"Sooner or later, Bill Clinton is going to have to come clean with the American
people on how he avoided military service," Mr. Quayle told reporters at an
airport near here. "Bill Clinton just needs to come clean. He needs to come
clean on this issue and how he avoided military service."

Asked how Mr. Clinton's avoidance of service in Vietnam differed from his own
decision at the same time to join the National Guard in Indiana, the Vice
President said: "Couple of differences. One, I told the truth and got all the
facts out. Two, I served. I put on a uniform. Wore the uniform for six years. I
didn't avoid military service. Bill Clinton did."

Message of Dissent

Mr. Quayle was here to raise money for the Republican Party and to kick off the
14th annual Ravenna "Balloon A-Fair." But the balloons were not to be cast aloft
until Sunday, and the only sight in the air today was a plane circling over the
crowded town square where Mr. Quayle spoke towing a sign that read: "Ohio Needs
Jobs Not Mr. Potatoe Head."

He was greeted by a cacophony of competing chants -- his supporters calling for
"Four more years," while an apparently larger number of detractors chanted "Four
more months" and "No more Bush." The critics included scores of college students
and union workers from plastics, rubber and auto plants.

Mr. Quayle initially maintained his composure, trying to ignore the protesters,
but they quickly raised his ire and he responded with such lines as: "I hear our
opponents screaming out there. I'd be screaming too if I supported Bill
Clinton."

At another point he said: "I guess a lot of Clinton's lawyers are here. I hear
it."

When he asked rhetorically, "Who do you want as President?" the crowd roared
back "Clinton." Still later, he accused the Clinton supporters of "booing
traditional values."

"I need your help once again," he implored the crowd. "You've heard our
opponents today. They booed my comments about traditional values. They booed my
comments about lowering taxes. They've booed my comments about reforming the
legal system. They've booed my comments about reforming health care. Let me tell
you this: We will never give Bill Clinton the opportunity to be the President of
the United States."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A CENSUS DISPARITY FOR ASIANS IN U.S.

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


Americans with roots in Asian countries and the Pacific Islands continue to
stand out in educational achievement, but this advantage does not translate into
higher per capita income, according to newly released Census Bureau data.

The latest data from a periodic survey of American families reveal that
Asian-Americans complete more years of school than whites, on average, and are
as likely as whites to be in professional occupations, but are still
underrepresented in skilled crafts and in executive suites. As a result, median
salaries of Asian-American workers lag behind those of whites.

And the report highlighted one other nuance: Because Asian-American families
tend to have more wage earners than white families, their median household
incomes surpass those of white households.

Slightly more than seven million residents of the United States trace their
ancestry to Asian countries like China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos
and India or to Pacific Island nations like the Philippines. They now represent
about 3 percent of the total American population.

The survey, taken in March 1991, showed that 4.1 million Asians, or about 60
percent of the total Asian-American population, lived in the West -- the vast
majority of them in California.

Educational Success

The report tracks earlier accounts of the relative educational successes of
Asians 25 years of age and older, 82 percent of whom have completed high school
(compared with 80 percent of whites), 39 percent of whom have completed four
years of college (compared with 22 percent of whites) and 16 percent of whom
have had at least one year of graduate study (as opposed to 9 percent of
whites.)

But it also indicates that the overall educational success of Asians does not
always translate into overall economic advantage.

For instance, according to the report, written by a Census Bureau demographer,
Claudette E. Bennett, Asian high school graduates earned 79 percent of what
their white counterparts made, $21,060 compared with $26,530, while the median
salary of Asian male college graduates, $37,550, was about 90 percent of the
median salary of white men, $41,660.

But earnings of Asian-American women equaled or slightly exceeded those of their
white counterparts. Among college graduates, the median salary for
Asian-American women was $29,150, compared with $29,110 for white women.

All the median income calculations are based on a sampling of adults 25 years
old or older who were working full-time. No comparisons were made with other
racial or ethnic groups.

Asian Blue-Collar Workers

The differences between the incomes of Asian-American and white workers offer a
window on the complex economic patterns among Asian-American wage earners. While
great attention has been focused on the academic achievements of
Asian-Americans, less notice has been given to Asian blue-collar workers.

"Asian and Pacific Islander males with a high school education were considerably
less likely to be employed in precision production, craft and repair occupations
(18 percent) than were white males (29 percent)," the report said.

"The lower percentage of Asian and Pacific Islander male high school graduates
who worked in high-paying precision production, craft and repair occupations, as
well as their lower median earnings in these occupational groups, ($22,770
compared to 27,600 for white males) contributed to the lower median earnings
they received," it said.

In 1990, the poverty rate for Asian and Pacific Islander families, 11 percent,
far outstripped that of white families, 8 percent.

But despite those elevated poverty rates, Asian households are still more likely
than whites to have multiple wage earners. As a result, the overall median
income of Asian families, $42,250, significantly exceeded that of white
families, $36,920.

This was true even though the per capita income of the Asian and Pacific
Islander population, $13,420, trailed that of the white population, $15,260.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Uneven Wages," shows median income in 1990 of full-time orkers
25 years old and older with four or more years of college, for white, Asiana nd
Pacific Island men and women. (Source: Census Bureau)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

After Hurricane, Floridians Show Symptoms Seen in War

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Sept. 19 -


Four weeks after Hurricane Andrew tore much of southern Dade County into shards
of debris, mental health experts are measuring its inner toll. They say that the
storm delivered the kind of jolt rarely experienced off the battlefield, that
they believe thousands of people are suffering symptoms similar to those endured
by Vietnam veterans and that some are taking out their aggressions on those
closest to them.

Reports of domestic violence have surged. Calls for help to the Domestic
Violence Hotline in Miami have more than doubled, to about 100 a day, and Judge
Cindy Lederman of the Dade County Circuit Court said that about 20 women a day
have been formally applying for police protection from husbands or companions,
up from an average of fewer than 10 a day.

Of course, most Floridians have not resorted to violence. And other indicators
of stress, like child abuse, murder and suicide, seem unchanged. But experts say
the hurricane has harmed almost everyone here in some way.

Daunting Dreams

Even those whose homes and possessions suffered little or no damage have seen
the results on television and felt the pain. Yolanda Caicedo, who has worked as
a secretary and a travel agent, had only a couple of shutters ripped off her
waterfront apartment in North Bay Village. But she has been waking up in the
middle of the night, terrified and drenched in sweat.

"In my dream everybody is sleeping out in the open, all mixed together," she
said, "and the rain is pouring down on us."

Anita Bock, a 42-year-old executive in the state's social services agency, has
been waking up in a panic several times a night. Victoria and Michael Hayes, who
publish a dozen newsletters, have suddenly started yelling at each other over
such things as whose turn it is to take care of their cocker spaniel. And for a
while, Buck Collison, an out-of work-bartender who is 69 years old, could not
remember what kind of car he owned.

For most of the two million people in the region, the mental health experts say,
the shock, mourning and grief of Hurricane Andrew will be a short-term
phenomenon that gradually fades.

Lasting Effects on Some

But Dr. Charles Gibbs, who is coordinating the work of volunteer mental health
specialists with the Red Cross, estimated that perhaps 25,000 people will suffer
lingering psychological effects. Some will need extensive counseling, he said,
and a few may have to be institutionalized.

So far, no previously healthy person has been placed in a mental hospital
because of the storm, said Randy Wilcox, the acting head of Florida's mental
health programs, and few of the roughly 40,000 people in the area who regularly
receive mental health services from the state have taken a turn for the worse.

But Mr. Wilcox said the state was gearing up in anticipation that the conditions
of thousands of regular mental health patients would deteriorate and that many
others would seek treatment for the first time. Washington has provided $3.6
million in emergency financing for mental health and the state is asking for
about $22 million more.

Already, outpatient clinics are being expanded and more case managers are being
hired. Because children are among those most disturbed by the storm, school
psychologists have been training teachers and guidance counselors to recognize
the emotional problems.

Counseling Storm Victims

Trying to minimize the number of people who sink deeper into misery, about 500
psychologists, psychiatrists and social workers, many of them volunteers but
some in the military and government agencies, have been counseling storm victims
at food distribution centers and at shelters. Some have even been going door to
door.

"Our people will walk up to them and just say, 'How're you doing? Anything we
can get you?' " said Sidney Shapiro, a regional director in the state mental
health system. "We want to let them know that they're not alone, that there are
people who care and will help you if they can."

Edward Calvo, a therapist for the Department of Veterans Affairs, said part of
the technique was to get people to relive the trauma. "I try to raise the same
feelings, as if it was happening right now," he said. "It's painful, but it
won't be as painful now as in two or three months if they keep it repressed."

Dr. Barbara P. Blank, who is in charge of volunteer efforts by members of the
American Psychological Association's chapter in Broward County just north of
here, said people needed "to realize they're experiencing a normal reaction to a
disaster."

Trying to Address Anxieties

"If they feel it's abnormal or that they're weaker than the rest of the people
they lose confidence," she said. "They get more anxious and tend to ruminate
about it. But when they recognize that it's a normal part of the process, that
these feelings are O.K., they have a better chance of getting over it faster. If
you don't address it, it will intensify."

Dr. Blank said the symptoms she and other professionals were seeing were similar
to those experienced after a war, often known as post-traumatic stress disorder
or Vietnam syndrome: edginess, trouble sleeping, spontaneous crying and
flashbacks.

The small army of mental health workers has been having follow-up meetings with
people who seem dazed or disoriented. State and military officials have opened a
24-hour emergency response center where psychiatrists, social workers and two
chaplains are ready to rush to people in trouble.

Many people have been shedding the stress of the hurricane without being aware
of what they were doing, the experts say, by recounting the horrors of the storm
to friends and relatives.

Though the destruction has been monumental, each day brings signs of renewal.
Even in the most damaged areas, most of the debris is gone from the streets,
power company workers are replacing broken utility poles and another few
businesses reopen almost every day. Children have gone back to school. All of
this, the experts say, is improving the collective state of mind.

"Most of the people are going to be O.K. in the long term because they're
already starting to see daylight," Mr. Shapiro said.

Some Face Depression

Inevitably though, said Kevin Huckshorm, who helps coordinate operations of the
state's seven mental hospitals, some people will feel stymied. Weeks will have
passed and their house will still be a mess. Then, Mr. Huckshorm said, comes
depression.

Jim Boughey, who owns Gator Office Supply and Furniture, talks as if he's
reaching his limit.

"It gets worse every day," he said. "You get home, and you have no electricity
so you try to go to sleep. But it's very hot, and you have to get up anyway and
get gas for the generator that runs the refrigerator. You get up to go to work,
and there's no hot water for a shower. You get sick of it."

But the mental health experts say Mr. Boughey is likely to do just fine. He has
opened all three branches of his company and repairs have been started on his
$300,000 house.

"Getting out there, picking up the rubble, rebuilding, that is therapeutic,"
said Dr. Gibbs. "That is one of the important signs of true recovery."

One of the most common occurrences since the storm has been disorientation over
time and place. Short-term memory loss has been common, too. When Mr. Collison
was first asked about his car, which has been missing since the storm, he drew a
blank. After a while he recalled that it was "a Chrysler product." Then, a few
minutes later, he remembered that it was a silver, 1991 Plymouth Acclaim.

Jack Jacobson, a social worker, clung to a set of wildly bucking double doors
through the worst of the storm. His wife, Carmen, also a social worker, and her
19-year-old daughter Jennifer, threw their bodies at the doors too. Howling
gusts knocked them off their feet and glass shattered around them, severing a
tendon in one of Mrs. Jacobson's feet.

"Driving to work on my first day back," Mr. Jacobson said with a quiver in his
voice, "there were times when I didn't know where I was."

In 31 years of marriage, Victoria and Michael Hayes had rarely raised their
voices with each other. He had been a foreign correspondent and together, they
had been through terrorist attacks and civil wars. But nothing touched them like
the hurricane.

"We've been screaming at each other," Mrs. Hayes said. "There's all this
frustration and anger. You feel angry at yourself because you know there are
worse cases. But you are angry. You are angry at everything. You don't know who
you are angry at and you feel guilty. You feel lonely and you feel abandoned."

Almost any kind gesture, she said, makes her cry. "A neighbor says 'I've got a
bunch of bananas for you,' and I get water in my eyes. I'm crying because I'm
sad inside."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 27, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about the mental health of people in South Florida after
Hurricane Andrew misidentified a clinical psychologist who was doing volunteer
work with storm victims. She is Diane P. Blank.


GRAPHIC: Photo: While many residents of southern Florida have been coping with
the trauma of Hurricane Andrew without being aware of what they were doing,
thousands more are suffering symptoms of acute emotional anguish. For most, the
shock, mourning and grief of the storm will gradually fade. (Associated Press);
Carmen Jacobson spent the worst of the storm in Kendall, Fla., helping her
husband and daughter hold closed a set of double doors. Shattered glass from the
doors severed a tendon. At home with Mrs. Jacobson were her husband, Jack and
her mother, Carmen Berriz. (Susan Greenwood for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All This Might Never Have Happened

BYLINE: By Ginger Danto;  Ginger Danto is a freelance journalist, based in
Paris, who writes frequently on the arts.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words



LEVIATHAN
By Paul Auster.
275 pp. New York:
Viking. $21.

IN the work of the contemporary French photographer Sophie Calle, the everyday
rituals of strangers inspire images that reveal anonymous lives as art. For Ms.
Calle, spying began as an unorthodox way of reacquainting herself with Paris
after a long absence, and she studied the behavior of randomly chosen citizens
in order to determine her own. By the time she began recording her observations
with a camera, she had parlayed her chance pursuits into a profession: she had
become an artist. That her subjects were unaware of her surveillance allowed Ms.
Calle to reinvent their identities, and thereby her own.

It is more than politeness that makes Paul Auster preface his seventh novel,
"Leviathan," with thanks to Ms. Calle for "permission to mix fact with fiction."
This acknowledgment is a clue to Mr. Auster's methodology in a work in which
fictional lives are circumscribed by recorded events, and real people shape the
destinies of conjured ones. The disparity between reality and its reinvention is
choice terrain for artists who seek to seduce their audiences with a sense of
familiarity, only to abandon them in unexpected but no less memorable places.
Yet if Ms. Calle happened to land here on her journey of self-discovery, Mr.
Auster's presence is intentional. He uses hints of the real world to anchor an
otherwise implausible tale, and to authenticate the coincidences against which
his characters collide.

Coincidence has been a modus operandi for much of Mr. Auster's fictive
population, back to an early hero, in "City of Glass," who learns that "nothing
was real except chance." The cast of his admirable new novel, "Leviathan," is
similarly predisposed, beginning with the narrator, Peter Aaron, who tells us
that he would not have written this book had it not been for his 15-year
friendship with a certain ill-fated Benjamin Sachs. As the alternate protagonist
of "Leviathan" as well as its raison d'etre, Sachs would not have met with the
sudden, violent death that is detailed in the book's first pages had it not been
for a bizarre sequence of coincidences that Aaron spends the remainder of the
novel unraveling. The list of "might not have beens" is as long as it is
circuitous, and it accounts for the detective-story ambiance of the novel's
opening, in which Aaron sets out to document the circumstantial and sentimental
premises for his work. While the pace slackens somewhat thereafter, as
characters indulge in overlong monologues, we are sufficiently intrigued by the
piecemeal accounts to want the larger picture. Appropriately, the book's rhythm
mimics life, where the aftermath of unexpected events is often protracted
reflection.

Reflection is also the writer's conduit to his material, and it is doubtless not
coincidental that the main characters in "Leviathan" are two writers striving,
however differently, to get some message to the world. This common vocation
explains the spontaneous solidarity felt by Sachs and Aaron when they first meet
in a Greenwich Village bar. Mr. Auster skillfully presents Sachs through his
sodden confession, moving from his arrest for draft evasion during the Vietnam
era to an account of the novel he wrote while in prison. In what is now winter,
circa 1975, Sachs is still wearing the beard he grew then, out of allegiance to
Thoreau, and riding the attenuated glory of "The New Colossus," his historical
novel set in late-19th-century America. Sachs's virtuosity at blending fact and
fiction enabled him "to read the world as though it were a work of the
imagination, turning documented events into literary symbols, tropes that
pointed to some dark, complex pattern embedded in the real," observes Aaron,
echoing Mr. Auster's own intentions.

That Aaron is disarmed by Sachs's talent reveals the narrator's more responsible
approach to art and life, and it is out of such a sense of responsibility that
he tells Sachs's story. This is just one thread of the symbolism woven into this
tale within a tale, as Aaron assumes the function of his biblical namesake, who
briefly served as God's spokesman. The analogy extends to Aaron's decision to
call his book "Leviathan" -- after the title Sachs gave to his unfinished second
novel.

The facts about Sachs are not as shocking as they are copious and complex, as
Aaron conscientiously chronicles the real and metaphorical downfall of a man who
relinquishes words for action. Sachs falls from a fire escape during a party on
July 4, 1986, while seducing a woman who is not his wife. He interprets the
accident as a sign that he must cease his career as an aphoristic essayist and
"step into the real world now and do something." Like other Auster antiheroes,
Sachs chooses itinerancy as his plan of action. He finds flight the sole elixir
for spiritual pain; the endless road seems the only viable destination. Where he
ends up is less crucial than what he discovers along the way: that he is capable
of nurturing and killing, fidelity and betrayal, stealing and forsaking, saintly
abstinence and indulgence in a lust that leads far from the moral path he
thought was guiding him.

Mr. Auster may write about coincidence, but there is nothing coincidental about
his prose, in which seemingly straightforward information has an allegorical
dimension. Even a reader unfamiliar with Mr. Auster's writerly predilections
would be alerted to the book's subtext by a title like "Leviathan," the whale
that Hobbes borrowed from the Bible as a metaphor for the state. Sachs's
misdeeds in the name of individual justice -- claiming to be the Phantom of
Liberty, he blows up replicas of the Statue of Liberty around the country --
provide a kind of pop scenario for this Hobbesian hero, whose nemesis is the
state. Sachs's death by his own artillery symbolizes man's doomed struggle.

Thus in the literary looking glass of "Leviathan," in which things are not
always what they seem, our pleasure in reading the story is enhanced by the
challenge of making other connections. As for the person who "permitted" Mr.
Auster this approach, she is accorded the special connection of a cameo as a
pivotal character. The model Sachs reaches for on that near-fatal night on the
fire escape is clearly Sophie Calle.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 20, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

UNIVERSITY PRESSES;
Man in a Flag Shirt

BYLINE: By Todd Gitlin;  Todd Gitlin is the author of "The Sixties: Years of
Hope, Days of Rage."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 756 words



ABBIE HOFFMAN: AMERICAN REBEL
By Marty Jezer.
Illustrated. 345 pp.
New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press.
$22.95.

Abbie Hoffman is often taken as a personification of the much-mythologized
1960's, but one of the merits of Marty Jezer's biography is that it uncovers
Hoffman's roots in the 1950's (he was born in 1936) and tracks his unsteady
transit into the inhospitable 1980's. The man everyone but prosecutors called
Abbie was that most American character, the self-creating confidence man.

As "Abbie Hoffman: American Rebel" makes clear, he was an original clown, a wise
guy, an outlaw fantasist, a chutzpah artist. He was also a manic-depressive who
rode his desperate cycle all the way down, dying of an overdose of pills washed
down with alcohol on April 12, 1989.

According to Mr. Jezer, the author of "The Dark Ages: Life in the United States,
1945-1960," this boisterous son of a pharmaceutical wholesaler (like father,
like son?) in Worcester, Mass., seems to have been born to clown and nettle.
Suspended from school -- by his own account (not always reliable) for defending
atheism -- Hoffman made his way as a pool hustler. He borrowed styles of revolt
from movies and Mad magazine, from Abbott (Abbie's given name) and Costello,
from rock-and-roll, from Abraham Maslow, the Brandeis theorist of
self-actualization, and from Lenny Bruce.

Gifted with a surfeit of entrepreneurial energy, he proceeded through an
astonishing range of jobs -- psychologist, civil liberties crusader, art
movie-house manager. But he found his passions intersecting with the collective
passion, and threw himself into the civil rights movement.

By 1966, the space for well-meaning whites in the movement had evaporated.
Meanwhile, the war in Vietnam was pulverizing reconstructive ideals. The war
"poisons everything," Hoffman wrote in a letter. At the same time, white hippie
runaways were flooding into the East Village in New York City, where he lived.
Hoffman imagined them as "runaway slaves" from middle-class society, visionaries
perforce -- never mind the actual wretchedness of hippie life in the streets.
When a "Free Store" he helped organize degenerated into a hangout for local
toughs, he could not face the reality and moved on.

Mr. Jezer, properly critical of many 1960's events, notes that Hoffman purchased
his capacity to shock at the cost of willful distraction from life as actually
lived. After the Free Store, the former organizer settled for the thrills of the
mobilizer.

The means was that theater of garish banality, television. A reader of Marshall
McLuhan and Antonin Artaud, Hoffman wrote to peace activists: "I think we should
watch more TV than read, listen to music more than lectures." He re-created
himself as a purveyor of radical shtick, and produced media stunts -- throwing
dollar bills onto the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, wearing a flag shirt
-- that had the paparazzi crying out for more. Imagining the United States to be
flush with revolutionary possibilities, he was a chief impresario of the
ill-fated Yippie Festival of Life in Chicago during the Democratic National
Convention of 1968, which led to the trials of the Chicago Eight and a meteoric
career for Hoffman as a campus rabble-rouser, promoting what he called
"revolution for the hell of it."

WHEN this phony revolution was beached in the early 1970's, Hoffman was left
stranded. Transmuting from revolutionary back to outlaw, he was busted for
dealing cocaine in New York and went underground, only to be reborn incognito as
Barry Freed, rousing his upstate New York neighbors to save the St. Lawrence
River from overdevelopment. Forced to shuck his celebrity, Hoffman the organizer
was able to win over a population to fight in their own interest -- more
successful than the 1960's mobilizer had ever been. He spent much of his last
years trying to pass on lessons to radical students, yet during these manic
days, his unreconstructed truculence often got the better of his constructive
instincts.

Mr. Jezer is a tender- but often tough-minded guide to Abbie Hoffman's
adventures. He does not deeply imagine Hoffman's exhilarated and tortured inner
life, and at times takes the buffoon too seriously. However, he has provided us
with a solid account of the life of an inventive, destructive luftmensch, and a
valuable cautionary tale for both the left and the right. "Abbie's Yippie
years," Mr. Jezer writes, "are a warning against fighting political battles on
cultural turf."

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Overview;
Day of Brawling for Presidential Camps

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


On a day of testy partisan squabbling, Gov. Bill Clinton televised the first
negative commercial of the fall Presidential campaign today, painting President
Bush as an unrealistic leader who talked about prosperity while the economy
tumbled into recession.

Vice President Dan Quayle found himself answering new questions about his
military record and trying to avoid discussing the Republican Party's
anti-abortion stand and Mr. Bush's agreement to the 1990 tax increase, as the
campaigns traded accusations on the draft, the economy and taxes.

The two camps also remained locked in a circular argument over debates. Each
side is insisting on holding Presidential and Vice-Presidential debates on its
own terms and accusing the other of being afraid of what both call a
"man-to-man" confrontation.

Attacks on Credibility

Both Presidential camps sought to use the day to undermine their opponent's
credibility. The Democrats told Americans that Mr. Bush, who has insisted for at
least two years that the economy is on the verge of recovery and still has not
acknowledged how sluggish it really is, can no longer be trusted.

"If George Bush doesn't understand the problem, how can he solve it?" the
Clinton commercial said, using film clips of Mr. Bush sounding upbeat about the
economy. Some of the clips were presented out of sequence to the events they
were intended to illustrate.

The Republicans, signaling that they intended to respond to Mr. Clinton's
commercial with advertisements of their own criticizing the Arkansas Governor,
continued to pound away at his draft record, which White House strategists have
made the center of their assault on the Democratic nominee's character.

But Mr. Quayle also found himself on the defensive on the draft issue in an
extraordinary, hourlong appearance on the NBC News program "Meet the Press."

Mr. Quayle dismissed an article in The New York Times today about his service in
the National Guard as a "rehash." The article repeated Mr. Quayle's assertion
that he sought the advice of relatives before joining the Guard. But it also
disclosed that the unit in which he enlisted was holding slots for people of
influence at a time when Washington had ordered all National Guard units to
accept enlistees on a first-come, first-served basis.

Mr. Quayle has said his decision to join the Indiana National Guard 23 years ago
"wasn't to avoid going to Vietnam." But he acknowledged today that he knew there
was far less chance of going to war if he was in the Guard. He said that he
sought no special favors and that "no rules were broken, no regulations broken."

The Vice President tried to steer away from the specific question of service in
Vietnam, on which he is as vulnerable to criticism as Mr. Clinton, and to stay
on the Republicans' designated target: the question of whether Mr. Clinton has
been completely forthcoming on how he avoided the draft.

"I don't think that military service one way or another is a definitive
character issue on whether you can be a good Commander in Chief or not," he
said. Mr. Quayle said Mr. Clinton had "not told the truth" and added, "That is
the issue that qualifies him or disqualifies him in my judgment from being
Commander in Chief."

Mr. Bush himself stayed out of the campaign fray. But he took advantage of a
meeting in Washington of the International Monetary Fund to appear before
television cameras at the White House as host to an international group of
finance ministers and state bank officials.

'Do-Nothing Administration'

Mr. Clinton was out on the trail courting Democrats who voted for Mr. Bush in
1988 in mostly white suburban Detroit and helping to register voters at a mostly
black rally in the South Side of Chicago.

Mr. Clinton urged the Chicago audience to register to vote and to show up at the
polls to end the "12 years of trickle-down economics" he said had left Americans
"working harder for less."

In Macomb County, Mich., where he was greeted by a boisterous crowd of people,
many of them carrying signs declaring their affiliation with labor unions, Mr.
Clinton said those who voted for Mr. Bush in 1988 were "betrayed" by a President
who broke his promise not to raise taxes and sought a cut in the capital gains
tax rate that would benefit the wealthy.

"They talk about traditional values, but they punish people who work hard and
play by the rules and reward people who cut corners and cut deals," he said,
adding: "This is a do-nothing Administration that will do nothing for four more
years if we are foolish enough to give it to them. And I don't think we are."

Mr. Clinton's oratory followed the track of the two commercials that his
campaign began broadcasting today, one of them focusing exclusively on
criticisms of Mr. Bush, with emphasis on his economic performance.

Torie Clarke, Mr. Bush's campaign press secretary, said: "Nobody disputes the
fact that the economy has not grown as fast as we would like or that not enough
good jobs have been created. We're saying that the most important issue in this
election is not just the state of the economy, but what do you do about it."

She called the commercial a "diversionary tactic to get away from answering any
questions about the draft issue" and said of Mr. Bush's opponent, "He is slowly
bleeding to death on this one as lie after lie after lie by Bill Clinton is
revealed."

The Bush team itself was clearly more intent on changing the subject, talking
about Mr. Clinton and the draft rather than the current state of the economy.

In his appearance on NBC this morning, Mr. Quayle tried to deflect questions
about the tax increase of 1990, asserting that Mr. Bush had been forced to agree
to the increase in October of that year because of the Persian Gulf crisis.

"He had an international crisis," Mr. Quayle said. "He could ill afford another
crisis at home, which probably would have happened by him not going along with
that negotiated deal."

But Mr. Bush first agreed to raise taxes in June 1990, and Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait was in August. Other accounts also dispute Mr. Quayle's assertion. A
senior official who was present during the Administration's deliberations on the
war and the Federal budget has said Mr. Bush never drew a connection between the
two issues.

Mr. Quayle, who has been trying to strike a more middle-of-the-road position on
abortion than he has taken in the past, also grew evidently uncomfortable when
asked about it. Although Mr. Quayle said he remained personally opposeed to
abortion, he refused to say whether it should be banned outright, as the
Republican platform, Mr. Bush's own stated position and Mr. Quayle himself have
demanded.

Instead, Mr. Quayle tried to focus on laws, like one in Pennsylvania, that limit
access to abortions. "I'm trying to change attitudes," he said. "I'm trying to
change behavior."


LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton arriving yesterday at a college in Warren,
Mich. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 21, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Two Faces of George

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Have we ever had two political campaigns so different in style and content? I
mean the two campaigns being waged by George Bush.

In one there is the President, reassuring authority figure, reaching out to all
Americans, promising to help them in their economic distress. This campaign,
positive in tone, offers an "Agenda for American Renewal."

In the other there is Pork Rind George, knee-fighter and scourge of un-American
values. This campaign, entirely negative, attacks Bill Clinton as a dangerous
leftist in the grip of alien ideology.

The negative campaign began in Houston. The convention there featured speakers
from the paranoid right, such as Pat Robertson. (He has called George Bush's
"new world order" a plan plotted by Satan, but that didn't keep him off the
speakers' list.) The convention theme was attacks on "the other" -- working
women, gays, the unwed, the un-Christian.

Mr. Bush embraced the extreme right in Houston in order to secure his base among
conservatives, especially the increasingly powerful Christian right. He also had
a particular strategic purpose: to shore up his support in the South.

When James Baker took over the Bush re-election drive this month, he changed
direction. The convention attacks on Hillary Clinton and others, and the general
tone of hate, had repelled many Americans. And Mr. Baker understood that to win
Mr. Bush had to target voters at the center of the political spectrum.

Accordingly, some of the most strident messages from the convention were toned
down. Vice President Quayle, the inventor of "family values," announced that his
grandmother had been a single mother and his sister was divorced. He and Mr.
Bush seemed to back away from the platform's demand that all abortions be made
criminal, even when the pregnancy resulted from rape or incest.

President Bush had been scheduled for weeks to go down to Virginia Beach, Va.,
and speak to a meeting of Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition. But reading the
polls, Mr. Baker decided that dramatizing the Bush-Robertson connection would be
bad news.

The solution was to have Mr. Bush speak to the Robertson meeting at 7:40 P.M. on
a Friday night, Sept. 11, after the last television network news broadcast. And
Mr. Baker rushed through plans for sale of F-15 jets to Saudi Arabia so the
President could announce them to a crowd of airplane workers earlier in the day,
dominating the news.

The jet sale reflected another aspect of the new, positive campaign: George Bush
as Santa Claus. He announced so many sudden benefits that a Lorenz cartoon in
The New Yorker showed a woman opening a letter and telling her husband: "My
goodness! It's a check from George Bush for $150,000 to fix the screen door."

But Jim Baker has evidently decided that the positive campaign is not working
well enough.

In Enid, Okla., last week Mr. Bush said Governor Clinton believed in "social
engineering" and an "elite central government." Those were old European ideas,
Mr. Bush said, and Mr. Clinton was for them because "he and a number of his
advisers studied them at Oxford in the 1960's."

Why did President Bush go in for such crude nativism? Because he is running
behind in the South, and even in Oklahoma, and because the latest Baker strategy
is to smear Governor Clinton.

A Bush campaign official, asked by John Aloysius Farrell of The Boston Globe why
they were so interested in Mr. Clinton's time as a Rhodes Scholar, said
jokingly, "You mean Red Willie?" It was not a joke when Floyd Brown, who put out
the supposedly "independent" Willie Horton advertising in 1988, wrote last week
that Bill Clinton's opposition to the Vietnam War while he was at Oxford was
"under the aegis and support of one of the most notorious Communist front
organizations in Europe."

Surrogates are doing much of the dirty work in the negative campaign. Newt
Gingrich says that the Democrats have Woody Allen's family values; the Bush
people disavow the crack, but the sting remains.

Watch the target, and you can tell which Bush campaign it is. There is one for
the North and one for the South, one for the center and one for the right.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words



International A3-17

PEACEKEEPING ON A BUDGET
President Bush had much to say about upending agencies to meet the needs of the
post-cold-war era. But his speech to the General Assembly skirted pledges of
dollars or troops to prop up his promises.  A1

The U.S. remains the biggest debtor on the United Nations ledger.  A14



MENDING A CONTINENT
Now that the discontent over the European unity treaty has crystallized, leaders
are looking for ways to sell the treaty to the continent.  A1

Italy sighs while tightening its belt after the French referendum.  A16

A new public sensitivity to ordinary people follows the treaty vote.  A16

U.S. is criticized for contributing to the currency crisis.  A17

Calm words are the cure for edgy voters and edgier markets.  A17

RUSSIA WON'T COVER SOVIET DEBTS
Russia said it was not liable for the entire $70 billion foreign debt left by
the Soviet Union, a refusal that complicates decisions about aid.  A17

NIXON OFFICIALS TESTIFY
Two Nixon Administration officials said that in 1973 they agreed that American
prisoners remained in Vietnam and Laos as U.S. forces were being withdrawn.  A1

PEACE AND PERIL IN EL SALVADOR
Tension simmers in El Salvador, as tenets of a peace treaty go into effect, but
peacekeepers do not foresee a coup attempt.  A3

INDIA'S POLITICAL MACHINE
Criminal gangs in India are increasingly enmeshed in politics, a battleground
for settling old scores and forming new power bases.  A7

ETHNIC WAR, ECONOMIC ROOTS
In Georgia, deep economic problems are shrouded in ethnic hatred and masked by
political subterfuge, but they cannot be forgotten.A8

FROM FIGUREHEAD TO OUTCAST
Arrest, exile and prison could not conquer Sanzo Nosaka, but fellow Communists
in Japan dethroned him on the basis of a 1939 letter.  A12

A new round of talks opens on ending the violence Northern Ireland.  A10

Diplomacy alone is no match for Haiti's troubles.  A5

After a century, Mexico and the Vatican re-establish full ties.  A3

Lima Journal: The strong women who tread the Shining Path.  A4

A 1989 report reveals details on ties to Iraq.  A15

Obstacles are overcome in Mideast talks.  A15

National A18-25

DOMINATING THE NEWS
Since the Republican convention, President Bush has succeeded in appearing on
the news with far more regularity than Bill Clinton. Analysts attribute Mr.
Bush's new air strength to a more aggressive campaign that has put the power of
incumbency to good use, and to Mr. Clinton's adoption of a play-it-safe media
strategy.  A1

CLINTON'S BUSINESS BACKERS
Gov. Bill Clinton's fund-raising drive has been collecting millions of dollars
from a growing cadre of Wall Street bankers and corporate executives who, until
this year, had been dyed-in-the-wool Republicans.  A24

RICHARD DARMAN, SURVIVOR
Despite his unpopularity in some quarters of the Republican party, Richard
Darman, President Bush's wily budget director, has been sliding ever closer to
the center of power. How he does it: hard work, flattery and intimidation.  A25

Political Week: The draft and a new generation of politicians.  A24

A GLUT IN PHILADELPHIA
As the economy in Philadelphia has soured and office vacancy rates have soared,
enthusiasm has dwindled for a new Federal office building. The Government says
it needs to gather its workers in one building, but real estate brokers favor
cheap leases in empty towers.  A18

AN UNUSUAL SCHOLARSHIP
The University of California has accepted a bequest from a school teacher and
Berkeley alumna that will provide scholarships exclusively for poor white
students, a first for the state system.  A20

SEX ABUSE PANEL IS SET
Cardinal Bernadin of Chicago named a board to investigate charges of sexual
abuse of minors by priests in the nation's second-largest diocese, part of what
is billed as a comprehensive plan to combat abuse by the clergy.  A21

Aladdin City Journal: Monkeys, parrots and Hurricane Andrew.  A18

Metro Digest B1

OVERHAULING SHELTER SYSTEM
Mayor Dinkins announced an overhaul of New York's shelter system along the lines
recommended by a mayoral panel that studied the issue earlier this year.  A1

FATAL SCHOOL STABBING
A 15-year-old sophomore and varsity football star at South Shore High School in
Brooklyn was fatally stabbed by a classmate wielding a dagger a hallway fight,
the police said.  A1

DEMOCRACY ON THE WEST SIDE
In a process that is part Machiavelli and part Marx Brothers, 962 Democratic
county committee members who are almost never called on to do anything will meet
to pick the next Congressman for 600,000 people in Manhattan and Brooklyn.  A1

Science Times C1-12

Back to Mars, after 17 years.  C1

A gene that stands guardian over cell division.  C1

Throwing a shoe or two to trace ocean currents.  C1

Vitamins backed against cholesterol-related heart disease.  C1

A new effort to list species before they disappear.  C4
Peripherals C6

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B8-9

Sir Geraint Evans, Welsh baritone.  B8

Edward M. M. Warburg, benefactor of the arts.  B9

David Bathurst, a former chairman of Christie's auction house.  B9

Fashion Page B7

Designers look to spring.

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Lincoln Center names 2 new directors.  C17

Chess: Fischer so far.  C18

Theater: "Brother Truckers." C13

Music: Concerts get new twist.  C13

Classical Music in Review C14

Word and Image:

"Tonight" show executive producer is dismissed.  C13

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Yanks debate expansion lists.  B13

Basketball: Is that dead Knicks' deal alive?  B11

Columns: Vecsey on Piniella.  B11

On Pro Football B15

TV Sports B15

Football: Giants defeat Bears.  B11

Coslet refuses to panic about Jets' 0-3 start.  B11

Soccer: Making the Cup safe.  B16

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Forward with Europe.

Symbol, substance and the police.

Sophistry in Detroit.

Democratic? Only in name.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Our German business.

Russell Baker: No afford in this future.

William Broyles: Clinton wouldn't enlist. He was right.

Mike Morton and Sabra Morton: The great computer debate!

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE U.N. ASSEMBLY;
Bush, in Address to U.N., Urges More Vigor in Keeping the Peace

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 21


President Bush told United Nations members today that Washington was ready to
support a greatly expanded role for peacekeeping missions and to adapt the
United States military to better assist in such operations.

But despite his stated willingness to promote the United Nations' role in
preserving the peace, Mr. Bush did not offer ground troops for the 12
peacekeeping operations under way. Nor did he offer any new money for such
tasks, or promise to pay the $733.1 million in dues and arrears that Washington
owes to the United Nations.

Mr. Bush also did not agree to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
suggestion that all members keep troops on standby for emergency peacekeeping
needs. "Member states, as always, must retain the final decision on the use of
their troops," he said. [Excerpts, page A14.]

An Expanding Need

In his remarks, which received polite applause as the General Assembly opened
its 47th session, Mr. Bush provided backing, however, for other proposals in
what Secretary General Boutros-Ghali calls his Agenda for Peace, a plan
published in June to expand peacekeeping operations to deal with the mounting
inter-ethnic battles and other crises.

Noting that "peacekeepers are stretched to the limit, while demands for their
services increase by the day," Mr. Bush said he would discuss with other United
Nations members convening a Security Council summit meeting to discuss Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's proposals.

The Agenda for Peace proposed a $50 million peacekeeping start-up fund and a $1
billion peacekeeping endowment fund. Mr. Bush himself made no commitments on
these suggestions, but said he was prepared to "review how we fund peacekeeping
and explore new ways to ensure adequate American financial support for United
Nations peacekeeping."

Mr. Boutros-Ghali has suggested that member states include their United Nations
contributions in their defense budgets, which usually get passed much more
easily than foreign aid or special supplements for United Nations dues.

Getting to what the United States was prepared to do now as an example to
others, Mr. Bush said he was directing Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to make
United States military bases, intelligence agencies and engineering units better
able to take part in peacekeeping operations. He is also to establish a
peacekeeping curriculum in military academies, something that already exists in
Scandinavia.

"Because of peacekeeping's growing importance as a mission for the United States
military, we will emphasize training of combat, engineering and logistical units
for the full range of peacekeeping and humanitarian activities," Mr. Bush said.

"And we will work with the United Nations to best employ our considerable lift,
logistics, communications and intelligence capabilities to support peacekeeping
operations. And we will offer our capabilities for joint simulations and
exercises to strengthen our ability to undertake joint peacekeeping operations."

Mr. Bush also said United Nations members must transform their defense
institutions and foreign policies to better cope with the new economic and
military challenges of the post-cold-war world.

No New Money

His address was in keeping with the overall approach of the Administration in
this election season: It has sought to adapt American policy to the challenges
of the post-cold-war world without having to ask voters to spend more money or
risk American lives.

While the President's speech contained various proposals, he provided few
details. Several of the proposals would require the approval of Congress.

Mr. Bush told the General Assembly that he would order changes in the Agency for
International Development and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. A.I.D. is
to be recast to better assist emerging democracies in former Communist lands in
the transformation to free markets. The arms control agency, which used to focus
on Soviet-American arms control, is to concentrate on limiting missile
proliferation.

The President also said he would propose to Congress the creation of a $1
billion fund of grants and credits for United States businesses investing in the
emerging democracies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. This would
come from the existing foreign aid budget, but Mr. Bush did not say which aid
recipients would have to give up grants as a result.

Offers Few Details

"We face the political challenge of keeping today's peace and preventing
tomorrow's wars," said Mr. Bush. "We face the strategic challenge of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We face the common economic
challenge of promoting prosperity for all. Meeting these challenges will require
us . . . to transform our collective institutions and look seriously at our own
governments and how we conduct our international affairs."

Senator David Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma and chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said many of the ideas in Mr. Bush's speech -- including
expanded peacekeeping training for troops and using the foreign-aid funds to
promote trade with emerging democracies -- had been suggested by him and other
Senate Democrats months ago, and initially resisted by the Administration. For
example, the Senate voted last week to allow the Defense Department to spend up
to $300 million a year to help with United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
an amendment sponsored by Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan.

The President opened his address with what seemed like a political shot at Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, his opponent in the Presidential election, who has
been criticized, especially by Republicans, for having avoided the draft during
the Vietnam war.

The first words of Mr. Bush's address were: "Forty-seven years ago I was a young
man of 21, and like thousands of others of my generation, I'd gone off to war to
help keep freedom alive."

Mr. Bush has been trying to draw a contrast between himself and Governor Clinton
in almost every speech.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush addressing the General Assembly yesterday. (pg.
A1); Acting Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, center, listening to
President Bush's speech yesterday before the General Assembly. With him were
Brent Scowcroft, far left, the national security adviser, and Edward J. Perkins,
the United States delegate to the United Nations. (pg. A14) (Joyce Dopkeen/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week;
Draft Issue: A Bomb in the Making?

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


At the Republican National Convention, vendors in the American Spirit Pavilion
sold a bumper sticker that read: "Once you have pulled the pin from Mr. Hand
Grenade, he is no longer your friend."

This year may be a preview of how the draft issue could become the Mr. Grenade
of Presidential politics for 1992 and future elections involving those who did
or did not serve in Vietnam. It has all the makings of an explosive generational
issue.

The problem is not limited to Vice President Dan Quayle and Gov. Bill Clinton,
whose desire to avoid service in Vietnam led them to ask family and friends to
help them get into the reserves. The record now seems clear that both men
received political help as they explored ways to avoid the two-year obligation
that usually led draftees to infantry service in Southeast Asia.

For the moment, President Bush is pressing ahead with his argument that Mr.
Quayle's six years in the Indiana National Guard make him better qualified to be
commander-in-chief than Mr. Clinton, who avoided service altogether.

Whether this argument will sell this year remains to be seen. But the issue of
military service could be trouble for both parties.

Of the half-dozen Republicans contemplating 1996 campaigns, James A. Baker 3d,
the diplomat-cum-campaign boss, served on active duty as a Marine lieutenant in
the 1950's, and Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp was on active Army duty for one
year. But they never saw combat. And the other Republican hopefuls got out of
the draft in various ways.

Senator Phil Gramm of Texas had a student deferment from Vietnam. Then he had a
deferment for an essential occupation -- teaching economics at Texas A&M
University.

Patrick J. Buchanan, who ran this year, sneered at Mr. Clinton for "sitting up
at Oxford" when duty called. Mr. Buchanan was classified 4-F in 1959 for an
arthritic knee.

Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense, was married in 1964 at the age of 23. He
had another kind of exemption: children.

Of this year's Democratic Presidential candidates, Senator Bob Kerrey won a
Medal of Honor in Vietnam, and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa flew into Vietnam and
ferried out disabled Navy jets for service.

But the list of prominent Democrats quickly moves away from active duty.

Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, was in the
Missouri Air National Guard from 1965 to 1971.

Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, who was mentioned as a
Vice-Presidential prospect this year and is said to aspire to the post of
Defense Secretary, was in the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps in
college from 1968 to 1972. He then got an honorable discharge for a cracked
vertebra.

Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee, joined the Army R.O.T.C. in college, got a Ph.D. in economics and
then served two years in the Army, at the Pentagon. Senator Sam Nunn, chairman
of the Senate Armed Services Committee, was in the Coast Guard from 1959 to
1960.

Todd Gitlin, a professor of sociology at the University of California at
Berkeley who wrote "The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage," said avoiding the
draft was the norm for middle-class and upper-class men, not an aberration. "The
Republicans want to persuade the country that we are still living in an era in
which the normal thing to do was sign up and fight the enemies of the nation,"
he said. "That country hasn't existed in 40 years."

If that is right, making an issue out of the draft may not be as simple as Mr.
Bush's strategists hoped.

This weekend, the Vice President had just got through attacking Mr. Clinton's
draft record on NBC when the issue was turned back on him. If military service
is a qualification for the Presidency, he was asked, wasn't Senator Al Gore Jr.
more suited than himself to be commander-in-chief?

After all, Mr. Gore graduated from college in 1969, the same year as Mr. Quayle.
Mr. Quayle joined the National Guard. Mr. Gore went to Vietnam, although only
for six months and as a journalist attached to an engineering unit.

Mr. Quayle was obviously vexed. "I don't think that military service one way or
another is a definitive character issue on whether you can be a good
commander-in-chief or not," he said, quickly adding the newly revised Republican
line that the issue of Mr. Clinton's draft record is one of credibility, not
military service.

On this last point, at least, there were surely members of both parties who were
vigorously nodding.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Says Economy Is Not as Bad as People Think

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


Hours after his Democratic rival began broadcasting a television commercial
accusing him of misjudging Americans' economic pain, President Bush told a
national radio audience today that the economy was not nearly as bad as people
believed.

In an interview with Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio talk-show host, Mr.
Bush said that the economy was "poised for a dramatic recovery" and maintained
that most people believed otherwise because they paid too much heed to the news
media.

"I think they're feeling negative about the economy because they hear 92 percent
of the coverage on the television -- where a lot of people get their news from
-- on the economy has been negative," he said. "There are some good things.
Interest rates are down. People aren't being robbed by inflation anymore.
Inventories are down."

Bush Attacks Clinton on Draft

He added: "A lot of people think we're in a deep recession in this country. The
irony is we are growing and we've grown for five quarters. Now, don't tell that
to a guy that's worrying about his job tomorrow, but I am telling you, the fact
that they've had hammered into them that things are a total disaster is
influencing people's judgments."

The President's comments came the day after Gov. Bill Clinton's campaign
broadcast its first television attack on Mr. Bush. The advertisement alternates
film clips of Mr. Bush making cheery economic pronouncements with bleak
statements about rising joblessness. "If George Bush doesn't understand the
problem, how can he solve it?" the commercial says at the end.

Mr. Bush also spoke harshly about Mr. Clinton's explanation of his efforts to
avoid the draft during the Vietnam War, saying his rival was guilty of a "total
failure to come clean with the American people" on the issue.

Responding today in Chicago, Mr. Clinton said he had been straightforward on the
draft matter, and cited an endorsement last weekend by Adm. William J. Crowe
Jr., the retired head of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, as evidence that the issue
should now be forgotten.

"Admiral Crowe has more credibility on truth-telling than George Bush," Mr.
Clinton said.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush with Rush Limbaugh during an interview yesterday
on Mr. Limbaugh's radio program. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Clinton Takes 21-Point Lead Over President in a New Poll

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


Expanding his margin over President Bush for the third straight week, Gov. Bill
Clinton took a 21-point lead in a new ABC News-Washington Post poll.

The survey of 637 likely voters taken Sunday showed the Democratic Presidential
nominee with 58 percent support to Mr. Bush's 37 percent. The sample had a
margin of error of plus or minus five percentage points.

The poll showed that voters were not concerned over new questions about Mr.
Clinton's account of how he avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Remarks by 2 Ex-Pentagon Chiefs on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


Following are excerpts from testimony today before the Senate Select Committee
on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs by James R. Schlesinger, who served briefly as Director
of Central Intelligence in 1973 and as Secretary of Defense from 1973 to 1975;
and by Melvin R. Laird, who was Secretary of Defense from 1969 to 1973. Mr.
Schlesinger's remarks were provided by the Federal News Service and Mr. Laird's
by Reuters:

JAMES R. SCHLESINGER

Q. You have said that you're convinced that some people may have been left
behind. Are you referring to Laos or Vietnam or both?

A. I have a high-probability assessment that the people were left behind in Laos
and a medium-probability assessment with regard to Vietnam. I think that of the
various parties, the North Vietnamese had the strongest incentive on the other
side to be forthcoming. But I doubt that that applied to the provisional
Government of Vietnam, and even the North Vietnamese were not enormously
forthcoming.

                                    .  .  .

Q. What do you think about the prospects, based on the intelligence reviewed and
people you've talked to, that someone would be alive and held by a government in
one of those countries today?

A. I believe that they would be -- those prospects would be very slim, Mr.
Chairman, as of now. But it's conceivable that one or two may have survived. One
or two or a handful.

Q. What happened back in 1973? I'd like to draw this out a little bit. We were
pressing for full accountability. We were pressing for the return of all
prisoners. It was a major issue. It was one of the major leverages of the
negotiations themselves, is that correct? The Vietnamese knew we wanted all the
P.O.W.'s back. We had laid that on the table as a principal issue.

A. It was the other side that had the leverage and that would give them
incentive to hold back.

MELVIN R. LAIRD

Q. In 1973, when you left the department, you had argued . . . it was your gut
feeling that the lists were not complete. Is that what you're saying?

A. It was my gut feeling that there were more. When I left, I think that we felt
at that time, and I think the last figures that we had were that the list of
P.O.W.'s probably would contain quite a few more names than that. We were
disappointed. I was disappointed with the list, because I hoped that there would
be more on the list.

Q. And it's fair to say, according to your testimony previously, that the
standards that the services applied to carry someone as a P.O.W. were high. Is
that accurate?

A. They were high. They were very careful on the P.O.W. question because they
didn't want to raise the hopes of people in an undue fashion.

Q. They didn't want the families to have an expectation that were unfair?

A. Right, and letters were really an important part of that intelligence. We
also had other information which I related to you in my top-secret testimony
that we were getting as far as the P.O.W.'s were concerned. And that did
confirm. But the strongest evidence was of course letters.

Q. When you say letters, you're talking about letters from a P.O.W.?

A. Right. When I first became Secretary of Defense, the total number of letters
that we'd received since January 1st of 1960 to February of 1969, total number
of letters we'd received were 620.

After we went public, and in January of '72 the number of letters had gone up to
almost 5,000. A thousand of those particular letters did come through various
peace activities. We were always glad to get those letters, because they did
confirm the presence, by handwritten notes, of these P.O.W.'s. And so by going
public we were able to increase the number of letters, and were able to verify
more prisoners of war after we had gone public.

                                    .  .  .

Q. Now, are you saying to the committee -- I understand that many of the people
who returned in Operation Homecoming and the 590 or so that were part of that,
there were letters confirming their existence as prisoners.

A. That is correct.

Q. Were there also letters confirming the existence of people -- I believe there
were some -- who did not come back?

A. Yes, there were. And of course some of those people may have. We've had it
confirmed from their colleagues in prison that some of them died while they were
in captivity after they had written some letters, and we've gotten that
information -- I've gotten that information from talking to my P.O.W. friends.

                                    .  .  .

Q. If there were approximately 5,000 letters received from P.O.W.'s, and if you
take out those who returned, those prisoners who returned, you take out those
who were accounted for from the debriefs as having died, approximately how many
letters were there from P.O.W.'s that never returned, and were never accounted
for after you do all the deductions?

A. I haven't gone through that process. I understand they have in the Pentagon
since the return of the P.O.W.'s, and I understand you have those figures. I
know at the time I left, we had confirmations in the neighborhood of about 474
or 478, give or take a few, confirmed by letter.

Q. How many of those, roughly, were in Laos?

A. Our confirmations in Laos, when I left, these are confirmations, I believe
were 5.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

P.O.W.'S WERE LEFT, TOP AIDES BELIEVED

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


Two former Defense Secretaries in the Nixon Administration said today that they
believed in 1973 at the time American forces were being withdrawn from Vietnam
that some American prisoners were still in Vietnam and Laos and were not
returned by the Communist authorities.

Opening a week of sworn testimony by top Nixon Administration officials before
the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, the two Secretaries --
Melvin R. Laird and James R. Schlesinger -- said it was common knowledge among
officials that Hanoi had not completed its promised accounting for servicemen
known to be alive in captivity, but who did not return in prisoner exchanges.
[Excerpts, page A6.]

After prolonged negotiations, the United States and North Vietnam signed an
agreement in January 1973 to end the Vietnam war. It provided for the release of
all Americans held prisoner by Hanoi and for an accounting of those prisoners
who had died in captivity. There was no similar agreement with Laos, but the
United States at the time expected Hanoi to use its influence to obtain the
release of Americans who had been captured in Laos.

Mr. Laird testified that the Pentagon had solid information, such as letters,
eyewitness reports or direct radio contact, on about 23 American airmen who
survived downings in Laos in 1973 and that he had told Mr. Nixon that. Other
officials gave similar accounts of Americans who were known to have been
captured and thought to be alive in Vietnam at the end of the war but who were
not accounted for in 1973 when Hanoi released its prisoners. However, virtually
all of them said they do not think Americans are still in captivity.

Mr. Schlesinger said the Nixon Administration's decision to gloss over or
dissemble on the prisoner issue seemed in retrospect to have grown from an
assumption "that the bargaining position of the United States in dealing with
Vietnam -- North Vietnam -- was quite weak."

"We were anxious to get our troops out and we were not going to roil the waters
if that could be avoided," he said. Asked if he continued to believe that
Americans had been left behind, Mr. Schlesinger said: "As of now, I can come to
no other conclusion."

An Unenforceable Accord

The two former Defense Secretaries and a panel of American officials who had
negotiated the 1973 peace treaty with Hanoi described an Administration
desperate to extricate the United States from its first, wrenching military
defeat by agreeing to a peace it would have no power to enforce.

With no leverage over Hanoi, no hope of support from Congress and no public
stomach for further confrontation with the Vietnamese, President Richard M.
Nixon and his national security adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, would not or could
not follow through forcefully when some servicemen -- estimates vary from dozens
to hundreds -- did not appear with the 591 prisoners released in the spring of
1973.

With the Watergate scandal looming larger every day, it became politically
expedient to "get Vietnam out of the way," as Mr. Nixon advocated in a
discussion with White House advisers on March 27, 1973, according to a tape
transcript circulated today by the Select Committee. Two days later, the
President told a national television and radio audience that all American
prisoners were on the way home.

Mr. Kissinger, who led talks with the Vietnamese and often clashed with Mr.
Laird and Mr. Schlesinger, is scheduled to testify on Tuesday. This is the first
time that high-level Nixon Administration officials have testified before this
committee.

Mr. Schlesinger, who was Secretary of Defense from July 1973 until November
1975, after serving briefly as Director of Central Intelligence, spoke of the
heated emotion he encountered when he took over the Defense Department more than
three months after President Nixon's television talk.

"When I did ultimately arrive at the Pentagon, there was a still a sense of
anger and frustration that so few had come home," said Mr. Schlesinger.

Asked about efforts by Mr. Kissinger to pursue the issue of missing Americans
with Vietnamese officials in the late spring and summer of 1973, Mr. Schlesinger
said that "we didn't know what was going on behind the scenes."

He said that other Nixon Adminisitration officials did not know that Mr.
Kissinger was "making overtures to Le Duc Tho," Hanoi's chief negotiator, trying
unsuccessfully to get him to sign a paper on May 23 saying that no Americans
were still being held.

Mr. Schlesinger said he believed that at most only one or two "or a handful" of
Americans might have survived the last two decades in Vietnam or Laos. He said
that accounts of torture and beatings brought home by prisoners led senior
military officers to conclude in 1973 that the Vietnamese may have killed
prisoners. Hanoi denied international relief organizations access to prisoners
of war.

Several officials suggested that a substantial number of Americans downed in
Laos may have met similar fates at the hands of the Pathet Lao guerrillas, a
group armed but not always controlled by the Vietnamese.

Mr. Laird, who was Defense Secretary from 1969 until January of 1973, when the
Paris agreement was signed, was at the center of the prisoner issue during its
most critical years.

Mr. Laird told the committee that the Defense Department based its belief that
unaccounted for Americans were alive in captivity at one point or another on
letters received from prisoners through various channels.

"We also had other information, which I related to you in my top secret
testimony, that we were getting as far as the P.O.W.'s were concerned," Mr.
Laird said. "But the strongest evidence was, of course, letters."

Laos ignored many American requests for an accounting of prisoners until the
spring of 1973 when Hanoi produced a list of 10 names, one of whom turned out to
be a Canadian. They were released by Hanoi under pressure from Washington.

Mr. Laird was sharply critical of the secrecy that surrounded much of the Nixon
Administration's conduct of the war and peace in Vietnam. He said that the
bombing of North Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia should not have been done in
secret. Instead, he said, it should have been discussed with Congress.

The Defense Department still lists 2,266 Americans as missing from the war. Of
those, 135 are listed as "discrepancy cases" involving enough information to
suggest that Hanoi knows what happened to the missing servicemen but has not
told the United States.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 6, 1992, Tuesday September 22, 1992, Tuesday

 CORRECTION:
A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in
the Vietnam War referred incompletely to President Richard M. Nixon's comment,
in March 1973, that he wanted to "get Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from
the White House tapes, is ambiguous. In its full context, it can be read as a
reflection of a desire to end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of
the growing Watergate scandal. Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a
reference to the scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr. Nixon was about
to deliver.

A front-page article on Sept. 22 about a Senate hearing on American prisoners in
the Vietnam War and a correction in this space on Oct. 6 rendered a comment by
President Richard M. Nixon incorrectly. In March 1973 Mr. Nixon said he wanted
"to get the Vietnam out of the way." The comment, from the White House tapes, is
ambiguous. In its full context, it can be read as a reflection of a desire to
end the American entanglement in Vietnam because of the growing Watergate
scandal. Or it can as easily be interpreted as simply a reference to the
scheduling of a speech about Vietnam that Mr. Nixon was about to deliver.

GRAPHIC: Photo: James R. Schlesinger testifying before a Senate committee about
missing Americans in Southeast Asia. (pg. A1); James R. Schlesinger, former
Secretary of Defense, spoke with Vernon Walters, former deputy director of
Central Intelligence, after Mr. Schlesinger said he believed Americans were left
behind in Indochina. (pg. A6) (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Kissinger Remarks on P.O.W.'s: Congress 'Undercut' Nixon

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Following are excerpts from testimony today by former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs,
including responses to some questions posed by the committee chairman, Senator
John F. Kerry:

OPENING STATEMENT

With respect to the missing: There is really, as I see it, only one difference
between us. Nobody ever questioned that the accounting for the missing was
unsatisfactory. We raised it at least 60 times during 1973.

The only difference is that we did not know of confirmed prisoners. And had we
known it, we would have taken the most drastic steps.

                                    .  .  .

Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the committee, 23 years ago the President of the
United States did me the great honor of asking me to be the principal negotiator
for ending the war in Vietnam. I might add, there were not too many applicants
for that position.

When the Administration in which I served entered office, it found 550,000
soldiers in Vietnam; 31,000 had already died there. We faced a ruthless enemy
without any regard for human life, or elementary principles of treatment of the
captured.

From the day we entered office, we had no more consistent goal than the release
of the brave Americans held prisoner throughout Indochina, and a full accounting
of their missing colleagues.

The negotiating record makes clear that this matter was insistently raised with
the Vietnamese. Despite Hanoi's protestations, we demanded that Hanoi guarantee
the release of American P.O.W.'s in Laos and Cambodia, and assist in accounting
for M.I.A.'s.  There was no issue on which American officials from the President
on down were more adamant . . .

After nearly four years of grueling negotiations, it was my privilege on Jan.
23, 1973, to initial the agreement to end the war that required the return of
all prisoners throughout Indochina and an accounting for the missing. I am proud
of what my associates and I accomplished. . . .

Here we are, 20 years later, being pilloried in leaks, without a shred of
evidence, for the unforgivable libel that we knowingly abandoned the very group
whose suffering was the biggest single incentive for our exertion.

The Paris accords were a major diplomatic accomplishment for America. As part of
the accords, we demanded and finally received from Hanoi agreements which
specifically made the withdrawal of American forces dependent on the release of
our prisoners and assurances of Hanoi's assistance in the accounting for our
missing.

Incentives and Penalties

Monday morning quarterbacks can argue that the Paris accords were not perfect. I
agree. To me the ideal outcome would have been an American victory. But, Mr.
Chairman, we had to deal with the war in the specific circumstances we faced. .
. .

For example, just as I was leaving for the final negotiations in January 1973,
the House and Senate Democratic caucuses each passed, by very large margins,
resolutions calling for legislation to cut off all funds for the war.

I challenge those flaunting their 20-20 hindsight to say how they could have
gotten better terms in that charged political atmosphere. What, precisely, would
they have been willing to do to achieve what particular changes and at what
cost?

Moreover, since Congress removed both incentives and penalties for Hanoi's
compliance, how exactly would any achievable amendment have changed Hanoi's
behavior?

                                    .  .  .

I am amazed to see press stories hinting darkly about prisoners abandoned by
their own Government. There has been talk of conspiracy extending through five
Administrations. Leaks assert that when President Nixon announced that all
prisoners were on their way home, he or his aides knew that many were left
behind.

That allegation is a flat-out lie. What has happened to this country that a
Congressional committee could be asked to inquire whether any American official
of whatever Administration would fail to move heaven and earth to fight for the
release of American P.O.W.'s and an accounting of the missing?

                                    .  .  .

While I was in office, we did receive some reports alleging that live Americans
were still in Indochina. I can assure you that all those reports were taken
seriously. No confirmed report of living American prisoners ever crossed my
desk, although I am not saying they did not exist.

At the time, returning prisoners stated that they believed that all prisoners
had been released.

                                    .  .  .


Favored Military Retaliation

There is, of course, the question of what more we could have done. During this
period, as I have reported in detail in my memoirs, and as I explained during my
deposition, I favored military retaliation against Hanoi's repeated violation. .
. .

President Nixon felt that on balance it was better to have one more negotiating
round.  And from the overall point of view, I had no reason to disagree with his
judgment, nor do I today.

Certainly there was little support in the United States for stronger measures.
Most commentators, I would say all commentators, congressional or media, opposed
any effort to stand up to Hanoi, arguing that the United States had no right to
retaliate at all against the North's blatant violation. . . . Nor did the
Congress offer support needed to resist Hanoi's violation.

We made no secret of our outrage with Hanoi's violations. During 1973, we
delivered at least 30 separate public statements or private messages to that
effect. . .

Unfortunately, it was also no secret that these efforts to pin Hanoi down
amounted to firing empty cannon.

In theory we had three sources of leverage available -- bombing the north,
offering economic aid to Hanoi, and giving military and economic aid to Saigon
to deprive Hanoi of the hope of military victory.

The Congress took all three levers away, denying us both the carrot and the
stick.  When the Congress eliminated our leverage, we were trapped in the
classic nightmare of every statesman. We had nothing to back up our tough words.
But more tough words.

Under such conditions, we had no bargaining position left. . . . I challenge
critics of the accord to say precisely how they would have achieved a better
outcome under these circumstances.

                                    .  .  .

So let us stop torturing ourselves. . .  The United States Government kept faith
with those who served their country and suffered for it. If servicemen were kept
by our enemy, there is one villain, and one villain only: the cold-hearted
rulers in Hanoi.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Q. Mr. Secretary, lightly and nicely, let me say to you, this is the longest war
in American history. In 1968, President Nixon came, and that was the year I was
in Vietnam fighting, came with a program for peace, supposedly. In point of
fact, what you wound up with in 1973 was extraordinarily close to the program
tabled in 1969.

A. Absolutely not.

Q. Very close.

A. Not even remotely.

Q. Very close. I've read it word for word.  But you suggest to me that those who
oppose the war somehow took away options from you. I mean, you know, that's
totally turning logic on -- I mean, the war ----

A. Mr. Chairman, it just -- what you are repeating here is the liturgy that one
reads all the time that happens to be totally wrong.  I don't happen to believe
that this dialogue is very helpful, because it refights the Vietnam War.

U.S. Leverage

Q. . . . You were the first person here to suggest today that somehow it is
inappropriate for me to ask a question because I represented a view that denied
you these things.

Now, I don't believe I denied you anything.

A. No, all I'm saying is that the people who, in good faith, were opposed to
continuation of military operations, cannot now say -- I do not in the slightest
question your good faith -- cannot now say you didn't get what you only could
have gotten by continuing military operations. That is all.

                                    .  .  .

Q. The question is whether we got the full accounting and if we didn't, why. The
question is did we move heaven and earth, as you said we would. Were we brutal
in our response, as you told the families we would be?  The answer is no.

Now, I've suggested that perhaps the reason is not that you were perfidious but
that the Presidency crumbled, that there was not a capacity. If you think it's
otherwise, I'd love to know.

'You Go Picking'

A. Yes, I think it's otherwise, Mr. Chairman. First of all, Mr. Chairman, it is
no great achievement. If you go picking through bureaucratic documents and use
one sentence to prove what the motive was, nobody can believe --

Q. Sir, this is not a bureaucratic document. This is an American serviceman who
was held as a prisoner in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words



International    A3-17

BRITAIN CUTS INTEREST RATE

Britain cut its benchmark interest rate one point, to 9 percent -- removing
doubts that it has abandoned its effort to stabilize its currency, and it will
concentrate instead on reinvigorating its economy.  A1

DANES TO GET A SECOND CHANCE

Danish voters, who narrowly rejected the proposed European union treay in June,
will be asked to vote again in mid-1993.  A16


GERMAN INTEREST RATES STAY HIGH

Most German bankers, politicians and others say they are doing the right thing
by keeping interest rates high and the mark sound.  A16

U.N. ASKED TO TRY HARDER

The European Community warned that the United Nations should become more adept
at resolving disputes before they become conflicts requiring peacekeeping.  A16

KISSINGER DEFENDS ACTIONS

Former Secretary of State Kissinger said top officials did not knowingly leave
American prisoners behind in Vietnam and Laos in 1973.  A1

U.N. OUSTS YUGOSLAVIA

The General Assembly voted to expel the truncated Yugoslavia from the seat
previously occupied by the old Yugoslav federation.  A1

TIES TO JAPANESE MOB SEEN

Evidence in a Japanese court suggested that some of the nation's top political
leaders had formed a secret alliance with mobsters.  A1

SEEDS COME TO SOMALIA

In a race to beat the rains, more than 1,000 tons of seeds are being distributed
through famine areas of Somalia by the Red Cross.  A3

Sudan's execution of A.I.D. employee shocks U.S. diplomats.  A6

TAKING ON RUSSIA'S PARLIAMENT

President Yeltsin's chief economic planner renewed grappling with a hostile
Parliament, warning that his policies must be restored.  A17

HARD SELL FOR ISRAELI LEADER

Convincing the public of the possible need to give up part of the Golan Heights
is proving to be a challenge for Prime Minister Rabin.  A10

Johannesburg Journal: A pathologist's new-found fame.  A4

National    A18-25

BUSH VETOES LEAVE BILL

President Bush vetoed a politically contentious bill that would require larger
companies to grant at least 12 weeks of unpaid leave to any employee to deal
with a child's or spouse's sickness or other family emergency.  A1

CIRCLING ARKANSAS

The President traveled 2,500 miles and visited the six states bordering Arkansas
to denounce Gov. Bill Clinton's record. In a departure from his strategy of
letting campaign surrogates handle attacks, Mr. Bush told audiences that his
opponent "delivers misery at home." A1

News analysis: how accurate is the Bush attack? A20

Mr. Clinton says Mr. Bush is "ducking" the debates.  A21

Political Memo: reality and "Murphy Brown." A21

THE KINDNESS OF STRANGERS

In the sections of South Florida ravaged by Hurricane Andrew, storm survivors
are marveling at the bounty of charity, from meals to money for rental housing.
A18

PHILADELPHIA STRIKE LOOMS

When Mayor Edward Rendell of Philadelphia came into office in November, he vowed
to make the city run efficiently and within its budget, even if he had to endure
a strike. He may have to.  A18

3 CABINET MEMBERS CLEARED

The special counsel investigating the House bank has told three members of
President Bush's Cabinet that they are not under criminal investigation for
writing overdrafts when they were Representatives. But a fourth Cabinet officer,
Labor Secretary Lynn Martin, has not heard from the counsel.  A22

A court allows a documentary on censorship to be shown.  A18

A ruling striking down a strict Louisiana abortion law is upheld.  A25

A former priest was extradited on sexual abuse charges.  A25

Education Page    B9

Citing budget cuts and union woes, Los Angeles superintendent resigns.

Baltimore parents, teachers worry as a private firm takes over schools.

Campus Journal: The hurricane did not deter Miami-Dade's students.

Metro Digest    B1

PROFITABLE CAN TRADE

About New York: From the ranks of the down-and-out scufflers who range through
New York city picking up empty soda and beer containers an elite has emerged, a
group of people called two-for-oners who have found a way to earn as much as
$60,000 to $70,000 a year by redeeming discarded cans.  A1

Business Digest    D1

Living Section    C1-10

Grand Central's Cinderella room awaits its prince.  C1

At tea with Ozzy Osbourne.  C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

60-Minute Gourmet C2

Jewish food traditions in a Poland bereft of Jews.  C3

Eating Well C4

Plain and Simple C4

Keeping the best of a beaux-arts beauty.  C6

Food Notes C7

Wine Talk C8

From blossom to berry to jam.  C10

Health Page    C12

Registries of birth defects sought to end information gap.

Personal Health: Deciding what to do about prostate cancer.

98.6 degrees isn't necessarily normal any more, a study finds.

Arts/Entertainment    C13-20

Playboy's interviews.  C13

Theater: In Review C16

Film: "Mr. Saturday Night." C13

"Together Alone." C18

Music: Met Opera opening.  C13

Dance: Critic's Notebook C13

Word and Image: Two books from Gore Vidal.  C19

Book Notes C20

"Mad About You" on NBC.  C20

Snooping on "48 Hours." C20

Sports    B10-15

Baseball: Dodgers want to cry uncle.  B13

Pirates and Expos lose.  B12

Basketball: Knicks get Charles Smith.  B11

Boxing: Notebook B14

Columns: Anderson on Simms.  B11

On Pro BasketballB14

On Horse Racing B14

Football: Giants rejoice over victory.  B11

Jets notebook B15

Hockey: Gretzky will not retire.  B14

Sports People B10

Obituaries    B7

Dan Lacey; editor who analyzed unemployment trends.

Thomas I. Fitzgerald, a lawyer.

Charles H. Shattuck, Shakespearean scholar.

Editorials/Op-Ed    A26-27

Editorials

Yawning at The Bomb.
Straight talk about the draft.
At last, a Dinkins homeless plan.
Small change for peacekeeping.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Bad and blue.

Fred Malek: Yes, 128 Clinton fees and taxes. Count them.

Andrei Codrescu: Gypsy tragedy, German amnesia.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Encircling Arkansas, Bush Opens Harsh Attack on Clinton's Record

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words

DATELINE: SHREVEPORT, La., Sept. 22


Trailing in polls around the nation, President Bush today unleashed a harsh
critique of Bill Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas and depicted him as a
man who could not be trusted to lead the country.

A combative, sometimes strident Mr. Bush derided Mr. Clinton as a "man who has
the gall to go around America and promise the moon, when on issue after issue,
the sky has fallen in his own backyard."

"He talks one way around the nation; he delivers misery at home," Mr. Bush said.
"We've all heard what Candidate Clinton can do for America, but that's very
different from what Governor Clinton has done to Arkansas. The record of
Governor Clinton proves that it doesn't matter what the candidate will say to
anyone, because he won't deliver." [Excerpts, page A20.]

A Tactic Renewed

To lend emphasis to the argument, Mr. Bush staged an elaborate game of political
encirclement, with Air Force One touching down more than six times in a single
day in the states bordering the one his opponent has governed for five terms.

Reprising a tactic from the 1988 Presidential campaign, Mr. Bush laid out a
broad, highly detailed attack on Mr. Clinton's record, accusing him in unusually
harsh language of a wide array of failures in leadership in areas like the
economy, the environment, crime, civil rights and health care.

Although statistically the President was on solid ground in his criticism of the
Governor's record, a closer examination shows that Mr. Clinton has accomplished
much in his state and that the statistics must be put into context to be fully
understood. [News analysis, page A20.]

In his stops today, a day that had once been set aside for a televised debate
between the candidates, Mr. Bush spoke of Mr. Clinton as someone who believes he
can win election "only by tearing down America," as one who is "playing that old
game liberals love to play -- class warfare," as the sort of Governor who
"coddles criminals" and wants to "raise taxes that will kill jobs."

But, in apparent recognition of Mr. Clinton's determinedly middle-of-the-road
persona, Mr. Bush also attacked from the left, criticizing the Governor for his
environmental record and his state's care of children and its record on civil
rights legislation.

The President's tactics seemed to draw in part on those he used four years ago,
when he stripped Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of his political appeal by depicting
the Massachusetts Governor as a spendthrift who had done a poor job at home.

Bush advisers said today that the President emphasized he was returning Mr.
Clinton's attacks on him, because he did not want to be seen as the first
candidate to go on the offensive. Now that the fight has been joined, however,
Mr. Bush may stick to his tough tone, a senior aide said, even though classic
political strategy calls for a return to a more positive tone just before
Election Day.

"He's going to go out and say it and keep on saying it, because it's time for
our principal to get into the fight," the aide said.

Difficult Straits for Bush

In the past, Mr. Bush has preferred to stay above personal attacks, letting
surrogates handle them. It is perhaps a measure of the difficulty he faces with
only six weeks until Election Day that he is now handling the job himself, and
in states that, by recent history's guide, should have already been safely in
the Republican column.

"We've got to get this in the mix," a second Bush adviser said, speaking on a
condition of anonymity. "But at the same time, and in almost the same
proportion, we've got to give people a reason to be for George Bush."

The President said: "For month after month, Governor Clinton has persisted in
attacks on me -- persistent, unrelenting and many very personal in nature.
Frankly, he has distorted my record, and his campaign chairman even called me a
racist. And this week, the Governor unveiled for the first time in this
Presidential race negative campaigning, negative television advertising.

"So far, right up to today in Springfield, I have resisted the urge focus on
Governor Clinton's record. But I must tell you, I am very tired of the
distortions, tired of the half-truths. And the stakes are too high to let
America be deceived by a negative campaign.

"So today, I have chosen to lay it on the line, talk about my opponent's record,
talk facts, talk about the record in Arkansas, the Governor's record. And that
means explaining the Grand Canyon that separates his rhetoric from the reality
of his record."

In tone and particulars, Mr. Bush's speeches at rallies in Missouri, Oklahoma,
Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee recalled his attacks on Mr.  Dukakis
as a left-leaning, blame-America-first, soft-on-crime liberal.

Trying the Canine Analogy

In Tulsa, Okla., the President said Mr. Clinton had "talked a lot, but done
nothing," on civil rights. Later, in Longview, Tex., he charged his opponent
with having a "sorry record, by any Texas standard," on health care and of
taking such poor care of the Arkansas environment that "the rivers are so
polluted the fish glow in the dark."

Then, in Shreveport, La., he said he wished that the tough-on-crime Candidate
Clinton -- "the Doberman pinscher," he called him -- could meet "Governor
Clinton, the Chihuahua on crime," whom he accused of having "the worst record in
the entire nation, when it comes to keeping criminals behind bars."

Mr. Bush's attack rested heavily on what his strategists see as Mr. Clinton's
great weakness, that many voters do not fully trust his character. The President
thus spoke of Mr. Clinton as "slippery when wet" and made glancing references to
his rival's much-publicized difficulty in explaining why he did not serve in the
military during the Vietnam War.

In Longview, Mr. Bush pointed to a World War II warplane parked in front of him
at the airport and said: "That's the kind of torpedo bomber I flew. I'm proud
that I served my nation in combat."

In Shreveport, a man listening to Mr. Bush's invitation-only rally at the
airport yelled out a question about Mr. Clinton and the draft, prompting Mr,.
Bush to reply: "No, I am not going to talk about the draft today. I'll let the
American people make up their minds about that. All I will say is that I am
proud I put on the uniform and fought for my country."

The Clinton campaign responded quickly to the attacks and accused Mr. Bush both
of being afraid to make his charges directly to the Governor's face and of
distorting his record.

"They obviously don't want to debate the Arkansas record face to face with
Governor Clinton, as they turned down the debate that was scheduled to be held
in Michigan today," the Clinton campaign's spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said.
"And they obviously are afraid to go into Arkansas and try to say this, because
in Arkansas people know that the Governor's record is one of progress, with per
capita income going up, welfare reform working, schools getting better."

While the direction of attack that Mr. Bush took today is not new in general
character -- "the failed Governor of a small state" has been a Republican line
for some time -- the specific accusations were far sharper and more detailed and
numerous than in the past.

On civil rights, Mr. Bush dismissed Mr. Clinton's claim of a good record by
saying that, as Governor for 12 years, Mr. Clinton has failed to sign a civil
rights law banning discrimination. "That's right," Mr. Bush said. "Arkansas is
one of only two states in America without a civil rights statute."

On Mr. Clinton's taxing and spending record, Mr. Bush said, "If you want a
horror story, listen to this: he has more than doubled Arkansas state spending
since 1983, and he has paid for it by raising the taxes that hurt the poor
working families the most." The Governor, he said, had doubled the state
gasoline tax, raised the tax on beer, inititated taxes on mobile homes and "even
taxed food stamps until the Federal Government made him stop."

On crime, Mr. Bush's charges sounded like a replay of the attacks his campaign
leveled against Mr. Dukakis over a Massachusetts program that allowed a murderer
serving a sentence of life without parole to escape while on a weekend furlough
and then brutally attack a Maryland couple.

Mr. Bush said Arkansas under Mr. Clinton's stewardship had "the worst record in
the entire nation," in terms of paroling inmates who had served only small parts
of their sentences, with "most inmates serving less than one-fifth" of their
sentences. Violent crime, he said, had increased more than 58 percent during Mr.
Clinton's tenure.

Ms. Myers, the Clinton spokeswoman, said Mr. Bush's charges were in many cases
distorted because the President omitted to say that Arkansas's tax burden was in
fact extremely low, that Arkansas led the nation in job growth in 1992 and that
the Clinton Administration's failure to enact civil rights measures had not been
for lack of trying.


LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A World War II plane, a reminder of an earlier time and former
job, was brought out for President Bush's welcome in Longview, Tex. (Reuters)
(pg. A1); President Bush greeting well-wishers in Springfield, Mo., as he
campaigned in states bordering Arkansas, the home of Gov. Bill Clinton.
(Associated Press) (pg. A20)

Map showing Bush's itinerary yesterday. (pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

P.O.W.'s Not Knowingly Left In Indochina, Kissinger Insists

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger said today that top officials of
the Nixon Administration did not knowingly leave American prisoners of war
behind in Vietnam and Laos when United States troops were withdrawn from Vietnam
in 1973.

On the second day of a new round of Senate committee hearings, Mr. Kissinger
rejected suggestions that the Nixon Administration, falling deeper under the
shadow of Watergate, had made a political decision to turn its back on the
unfinished business of Vietnam.

"Let's stop torturing ourselves," Mr. Kissinger said. "The United States kept
faith with those who served their country. If servicemen were kept by our
enemies, there is one villain and one villain only: the cold-hearted rulers in
Hanoi." [Excerpts, page A8.]

Issue Never Put to Rest

The day was marked by bitter exchanges with Senators whom he cast as
representatives of the anti-war lobby that hobbled the Nixon Administration's
ability to retaliate for North Vietnamese violations of the January 1973 accord.
Mr. Kissinger, who was the chief American negotiator with the Communist North
Vietnamese, said he could not rule out that Americans had been "kept behind" by
Communists in Indochina, particularly by the Pathet Lao movement in Laos.

The issue of Americans believed to have been captured by Communist forces in
either Vietnam or Laos and not returned or otherwise accounted for after the
signing of the 1973 accord has never been put to rest. There have been
unsubstantiated assertions for years about sightings of Americans in Laos or
Vietnam.

The Senate committee headed by Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachussets,
has produced hundreds of documents on the subject. On Monday, Melvin R. Laird
and James R. Schlesinger, both of whom served as Secretary of Defense at
different times in 1973, told Mr. Kerry's special committee that they believed
even in 1973 that some prisoners may not have been returned and were probably
alive for a time. That led Mr. Kissinger today to say that if they believed that
they never told him.

Mr. Kissinger expressed particular frustration with Mr. Schlesinger, someone
with whom he was often at odds. Mr. Schlesinger, who also served as Director of
Central Intelligence, said on Monday that there was a "high probability" that
Laos kept some prisoners and a "medium probability" that Vietnam did.

He challenged Mr. Schlesinger to find "one memorandum, one phone conversation,
one meeting or one anything in which he expressed at the time the views he
expressed now."

Mr. Kissinger said that as national security adviser to President Nixon and
chief negotiator with the North Vietnamese, he had pressed Hanoi for months
after the signing of the 1973 accord for better accounting of men who were
inexplicably missing or thought to be in captivity who had not come home, and
were not on a list of dead provided by Hanoi.

"I never said they're all dead," he told the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, about the unaccounted for Americans. He said that on Feb.
11, 1973, he first presented Hanoi with discrepancies arising from the lists it
had provided of the prisoners.

Mr. Kissinger served as Secretary of State from 1973 to 1977 and as national
security adviser from 1969 to 1975. Of Mr. Laird, who accused Mr. Kissinger of
allowing the Vietnamese to put off an exchange of prisoner lists until the
signing of the 1973 accord -- therefore making it likely that it would be too
late to deal with serious discrepancies -- Mr. Kissinger said today, "I didn't
quite follow what Secretary Laird was saying, but that's nothing new to me."

Also on Monday, Winston Lord, one of Mr. Kissinger's top aides during the peace
talks, told the committee that President .Nixon had been forced to make an
"agonizing" choice in the spring of 1973 about whether to reopen hostilities
with Vietnam over the issue of unaccounted Americans.

Mr. Kissinger said today that Mr. Lord may have been referring to a period in
late March 1973 when the national security adviser and other officials were
suggesting that Washington threaten Vietnam with a resumption of military force
if it failed to live up to the peace agreement. Mr. Nixon decided that would be
unwise, because 160 prisoners were still to be returned by Hanoi, an exchange
that was completed on March 28.

Addressing Mr. Kerry, Mr. Kissinger said that "with respect to the missing,
there is really, as I see it, only one difference between us."

"Nobody ever questioned that the accounting for the missing was unsatisfactory,"
Mr. Kissinger said. "We raised it at least 60 times during 1973. The only
difference is that we did not know of confirmed prisoners, and had we known it,
we would have taken the most drastic steps."

This afternoon, Mr. Kissinger said that the White House did not make itself
responsible for keeping detailed lists of prisoners before the signing of the
peace accord, and would not have known independently if men were missing from
Hanoi's lists. It was not until the weeks after the signing of the treaty that
he began to be aware of Defense Department concerns about specific Americans who
were inexplicably not among the returning prisoners.

In hindsight, Mr. Kissinger said, he thought that the possibility that prisoners
were left behind was "low" for Vietnam, but "somewhat higher" in Laos." He also
said that 10 foreigners -- 9 Americans and a Canadian -- purportedly freed by
the Pathet Lao through Hanoi along with Vietnamese-held prisoners had never
really been in Laotian custody, since Vietnamese troops were numerous in Laos.

"It is possible we never got a Pathet Lao prisoner," he said. "The Pathet Lao
may have done what the Khmer Rouge did: kill every prisoner."

Estimates of Americans who may have been prisoners in Laos range from 40 to
several hundred. The United States had no agreement with Laos, with which it was
not technically at war, although American bombers regularly raked the Ho Chi
Minh Trail, which ran through the poor Southeast Asian country. A "secret war"
was also fought on the ground by American-trained Laotian tribal people.

After the end of French colonial rule in 1954, Laos had a series of unstable
coalition governments until 1975, when the Pathet Lao, believed to be a ruthless
movement doing Hanoi's bidding, gradually seized power in the wake of the
collapse of Saigon to Hanoi's troops and the fall of Cambodia to the Khmer
Rouge, who had also been backed originally by the North Vietnamese.

When the United States withdrew from Vietnam in 1973, the Nixon Administration
expected Hanoi to take responsibility for prisoners in Laos and Cambodia.

Today, Mr. Kissinger tried to lay the blame for missing Americans squarely on
the Vietnamese.

"From the day we entered office, we had no more consistent goal than the release
of the brave Americans held prisoner throughout Indochina, and a full accounting
of their missing colleagues," he said.

He said that he and his colleagues were being "pilloried in leaks, without a
shred of evidence, for the unforgivable libel that we knowingly abandoned the
very group whose suffering was the biggest single incentive for our exertion."

He said such suggestions were "a flat-out lie."

"What has happened to this country that a Congressional committee could be asked
to inquire whether any American official of whatever administration would fail
to move heaven and earth to fight for the release of American P.O.W.'s and an
accounting of the missing," he said.

In often heated and emotional exchanges, Mr. Kissinger tangled several times
with Senator Kerry. Mr. Kerry, a decorated Navy officer who fought in Vietnam in
the 1960's but turned against the war after his return, was accused by Mr.
Kissinger of being part of the problem in 1973.

After Mr. Kerry spoke of two specific cases of servicemen known to be alive in
the late 1960's who did not return, along with other evidence collected by the
committee over nearly a year and excerpts from Mr. Kissinger's memoirs that
seemed to undercut some of his assertions, the former national security adviser
shot back, "First of all, Mr. Chairman, it is no great achievement to go picking
through bureaucratic documents and use one sentence to prove what the motive
was."

Mr. Kerry replied: "Sir, this is not a bureaucratic document. This is an
American serviceman who was held as a prisoner in Vietnam."

At another point, Mr. Kissinger accused Mr. Kerry, whose committee has succeeded
in having thousands of secret papers declassified, of "just playing with
documents."

"Sir, I'm playing with facts," Mr. Kerry said.


LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger at hearing
yesterday. (pg. A1); Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, left, talking
with Senator John F. Kerry, head of the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, before testifying yesterday. At right was Senator Robert C. Smith.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Straight Talk About the Draft

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 485 words


Vice President Quayle is in no position to disparage either Gov. Bill Clinton's
record of avoiding military service in Vietnam or his failure to speak candidly
about it. And President Bush has no grounds for attacking Mr. Clinton either
about military service or candor when his own running mate is so vulnerable.

The same political liability burdens both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Quayle. Each used
legal options to avoid serving in Vietnam, thus profiting from their country's
unjust system of choosing who had to fight that unpopular war. And like many
Americans who duck or oppose military service, each has trouble talking straight
about it.

Mr. Quayle, who joined Indiana's National Guard in 1969, must have assumed that
by surviving criticism during the 1988 campaign he was now free to pummel Mr.
Clinton, who flirted with an Arkansas R.O.T.C. unit long enough to lower his
chances to be drafted. Mr. Quayle concedes, as he must for his own candidacy,
that a President who has never seen battle may nevertheless be a fit Commander
in Chief. But he challenges "the veracity of Bill Clinton" in describing his
draft maneuverings of the past.

Yet not until last weekend on "Meet the Press" did Mr. Quayle come clean about
the effect of his own draft-avoiding actions: "Obviously, if you join the
National Guard, you have less of a chance to go to Vietnam." True, some Indiana
Guardsmen did fight and die in Vietnam. But Mr. Quayle, always proclaiming his
support for the war, landed one of the safest places for a draftable young man
while others fought.

Four years ago Mr. Quayle denied that family influence had helped him skip to
the head of the line for Guard slots. But as Kevin Sack and Jeff Gerth of The
New York Times have reported, Indiana's headquarters unit was a haven of
preference where vacancies were available mainly to a knowledgeable few. Mr.
Quayle was steered there after high-level inquiries from a former state Guard
commander who worked for Mr. Quayle's grandfather.

Now President Bush, who served with distinction in World War II, has entered the
debate personally. On a radio talk show he leveled a new, inaccurate charge that
Mr. Clinton, in a letter to an R.O.T.C. official, condemned not only the Vietnam
War but the entire military as immoral. "I have a very different concept of
military service," Mr. Bush said.

The actions of candidates ought to be judged against the temper of their times.
Mr. Bush enlisted in a broadly supported war, at a time of national peril, when
young men stood in line all night after Pearl Harbor to volunteer. A generation
later, Mr. Clinton, who strongly opposed the Vietnam War, and Mr. Quayle, who
supported it, took legal options to avoid combat, as did the vast majority of
their contemporaries. No wonder the polls show little interest in this attempt
to stir the Vietnam ashes. It's past time to move on to the present.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Among Many Lists, Tales of Missing Americans

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


On May 18, 1965, when the American war in Indochina was still in its early
stages, Capt. David L. Hrdlicka, an Air Force pilot, was shot down in an F-105D
over Laos. He walked away from the crash, and into oblivion.

There is evidence he survived: The Communist Pathet Lao who apparently captured
him took pictures. One of them appeared in the Soviet newspaper Pravda in Moscow
and a Vietnamese daily in Hanoi; another was later displayed in a Lao museum.
His arrest was announced on the radio. The Pathet Lao also broadcast a tape
recording purportedly of the American pilot asking for pardon and release.

List Presented to Hanoi


In Washington, Captain Hrdlicka was registered as a prisoner of war, an early
entry on a list that would contain hundreds by January 1973, when Hanoi and the
Nixon Administration signed a peace agreement. American forces began to withdraw
from Vietnam, and prisoners began returning home.

Captain Hrdlicka was not among the 591 United States servicemen returned by
Hanoi in Operation Homecoming. Like Pfc. Jon Sparks, ambushed in central
Vietnam; Lieut. Ronald W. Dodge, who ejected from an aircraft over North
Vietnam, and dozens of other servicemen and a few civilians in official custody,
Captain Hrdlicka became a "discrepancy case."

His name was placed on a selected but by no means comprehensive list of 82
servicemen who inexplicably did not return, to be presented to Hanoi a few
months after the Paris peace treaty by Henry A. Kissinger, President Richard M.
Nixon's national security adviser and later Secretary of State. The Vietnamese
never responded to requests for information.

Now, in the blizzard of documents circulating here as the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs tries to narrow and identify the number of
Americans who may have been left behind in Indochina when American forces were
withdrawn, that 1973 list, declassified for the first time this week, has become
one more piece in a still unfinished puzzle.

In hearings this week, top officials of the Nixon Administration have sparred
over what was known in 1973 about the missing, reflecting confusion and
controversy. None of the officials, including Mr. Kissinger, the chief
negotiator with the Vietnamese, and two former Secretaries of Defense, Melvin R.
Laird and James R. Schlesinger, were able to say categorically that no Americans
had been left behind -- or "kept" behind by Communist governments, in Mr.
Kissinger's preferred terminology.

What was in dispute is whether anyone could confirm that American prisoners were
alive in captivity when United States withdrew. Hanoi had denied access to its
prisons to the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Separate investigations conducted by the Defense Intelligence Agency and the
Senate Select Committee indicate that there are still between 100 and 200
discrepancy cases awaiting attention by Hanoi or the Laotian Government, nearly
20 years after the Paris peace accord. But the two lists while similar in length
-- 133 for the Select Committee, 135 for the Pentagon -- are not the same; only
about 40 names appear on both.

When Operation Homecoming began in early 1973, the United States listed 1,929
servicemen as P.O.W.-M.I.A. Some 1,100 more were classified as K.I.A.-B.N.R. --
killed in action, body not recovered. All people lost in covert operations were
apparently on those lists, including 150-200 whose places of death were
falsified to hide their presence in Cambodia or Laos, where Americans were not
supposed to be.

Officials of the Nixon Administration have said again and again this week that
these figures do not mean there were large numbers -- if any -- of live
prisoners identifiable absolutely by name and location when American forces were
withdrawn, only that there were a significant number known to have survived a
crash or capture. Hanoi has consistently maintained it held no American
prisoners after 1973.

Nearly all officials involved with the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue are certain that no
Americans have survived. Many family members believe otherwise.

Officially, the United States still lists 2,266 Americans as unaccounted for in
Indochina, more than half cases of unrecovered bodies. Of the remainder, the
Defense Department says Hanoi could help explain at least 80-100 of its 135
extant discrepancy cases.

What officials are looking for in these cases is not living Americans but
explanations of what happened to the people who did not come home.

Some cases have been closed by Hanoi. The remains of Lieutenant Dodge, whom
Vietnamese officials denied knowledge of in 1973, were later returned without
explanation. His story has become a symbol of the mysterious behavior of Vietnam
on this issue, an attitude that has helped immeasurably to foster beliefs that
Americans were killed in contravention of international conventions, consigned
to secret prisons or sent to Moscow or Beijing.

Leo Hrdlicka said in an interview today that he has been given information by
former intelligence officials that has led him to believe that his brother David
was sent to the Soviet Union, although both Moscow and Hanoi deny this.

The case of Private Sparks, ambushed with his platoon on June 17, 1969, in what
was still South Vietnam, remains under active investigation by the Pentagon.
Private Sparks was reported captured; a 1970 letter confirmed this, officials
say. The soldier was nevertheless declared dead in 1979 because there had been
no new information. It was unexpectedly reopened in 1989 after reports of
sightings of an American who fit his profile.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Expulsion of Yugoslavia Breeds Defiance and Finger-Pointing

BYLINE: By CHUCK SUDETIC,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Sept. 23


Serbs reacted with defiance and despair today to Yugoslavia's ouster from the
United Nations, and the nationalists who hold power tried to pin the blame on
the Serbian-American millionaire they drafted to become Prime Minister 10 weeks
ago.

But Serbs waiting in a four-mile-long gasoline line were more concerned by the
international economic embargo, now in its fourth month, and some blamed the
nationalist leadership.

"The decision to oust Yugoslavia from the United Nations was such a slap to the
Serbs and Montenegrins that most people here don't understand it," said Tomislav
Vidic, a retired engineer, "but the ones who are guilty are the people in the
ruling party here."

'They Are Never Guilty'

"The leadership here is infected with the idea that they are never guilty of
anything," said Mr. Vidic, who has slept in his car for five nights and is still
a mile away from the pump.

"They'll do whatever they must to destroy Panic," he said, referring to Milan
Panic, the American who is the federal Prime Minister.

Mr. Vidic accused Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia and the most
powerful man in Yugoslavia, of trying to use Mr. Panic as a scapegoat for the
United Nations vote and the economic collapse, which has seen the monthly
inflation rate rise above 50 percent and unemployment to between 50 percent and
70 percent.

The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly on Tuesday night to
prevent the Serb-dominated Government of the rump Yugoslavia from taking the
seat held by the old six-republic federation. It was the first such expulsion.

"Even in situations involving the bloodiest wars with the worst consequences,
Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq-Iran and others, the question of cancellation of
membership was never raised," Borisav Jovic, president of the Serbian Socialist
Party, told the federal Parliament on Tuesday, when the vote was no longer in
doubt.

Who Is At War?

The Government of Yugoslavia, which now includes only Serbia and Montenegro, has
been condemned worldwide for giving military support to the Serbian minority in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Serbian forces in Bosnia ignited the war there in
April with the stated aim of establishing an independent enclave stripped of all
non-Serbs. Thousands of Muslims and Croatians in Bosnia have been made refugees
by this process.

But Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Serbs in Bosnia, told a news conference
today in Belgrade that the General Assembly's vote had "no chance to influence
the war in Bosnia, simply because Yugoslavia has nothing to do with that war."

Croatia, which fought its own bloody war with Yugoslavia after it declared
independence last year, also denies it is militarily involved in the war. But
American, British and Yugoslav military analysts estimate that 30,000 Croatian
Army soldiers are in Bosnia, with the aim of annexing territory.

The General Assembly ruled that today's Yugoslavia must re-apply for membership.
Three of the republics have already joined the General Assembly: Slovenia,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The sixth, Macedonia, has not yet won wide
recognition.

The United Nations Security Council said it would not consider Yugoslavia's
application for three months.

Winning Respect

Mr. Panic, a California pharmaceuticals magnate, was recruited at the urging of
Dobrica Cosic, the federal President and at the time an ally of Mr. Milosevic.
Although Mr. Panic has never made a secret of his disagreements with Mr.
Milosevic, Western officials have said he lacks the power to change Belgrade's
nationalist policies.

But after defeating a no-confidence motion in Parliament, and with a recent poll
naming him the country's most popular politician, Mr. Panic has mounted a more
credible challenge.

In the federal Parliament on Tuesday, Mr. Milosevic's supporters fiercely
attacked Mr. Panic as "a fundamental political catastrophe for Serbia," in the
words of Brana Crncevic.

'We'll Go It Alone'

Vojislav Seselj, a proponent of "ethnic cleansing" and a commander of the
Serbian militia in Bosnia, also lashed out at the United States.

"America has decided to break Serbia's back," Mr. Seselj said. "We must stand in
America's way and endure everything they have cooked up for us. Cunning America
has set entire scientific institutions to work to liquidate the Serbian people
as a serious political factor in the Balkans.

"We should never apply for re-admission to the United Nations," he said. "We'll
go it alone."

[Informed this evening in Washington of the attacks by Mr. Crncevic and Mr.
Seselj, Mr. Panic responded: "This demonstrates not only a lack of understanding
of where the world is today, but where the world is going."]

United Nations officials say sanctions will remain until Belgrade recognizes
Croatia and Bosnia and the borders that existed before Serbian irregulars began
carving out territory.

"This is difficult for Serbs to accept because a Croat drew these borders," said
Damir Katic, a 29-year-old engineering student, referring to Marshal Tito, the
Communist dictator who kept Yugoslavia's rabid nationalists at bay for 35 years
after World War II. "But for our leaders to say that Serbia doesn't need the
international community would be like the Earth saying it doesn't need the
galaxy."

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Hearing the Fears, With No Answers

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1471 words

DATELINE: YPSILANTI, Mich.


If the General Motors Willow Run Assembly Plant, with 4,000 hourly workers, is a
small town, then Bob Harlow is the mayor. He is the president of the auto
workers' Local 1776. Only now, his town is going out of business. The cars it
has been building will be produced instead in Arlington, Tex. Bob Harlow's
people are scared about their futures. They want answers.

When is the plant going to close? Should we move to Arlington? How do they treat
blacks in Texas? If we don't go, will we get picked up at other plants in
Michigan? How long will Arlington stay open? What about early retirement? What's
going to happen after the contract expires? Why are they closing our plant?

Wherever he goes, from the union hall to the plant to the supermarket to home,
Mr. Harlow, a coal miner's son who went to work on the line 27 years ago, has to
tell people he doesn't know. "We'll be open for sure through the end of March,"
he told retirees as they met over coffee and doughnuts in the union hall. "But
things could change to maybe July, August or September."

Red Evans, the financial secretary of the local, said: "When things are running
smoothly, the president is about the best job in the world. Things hardly run
smoothly anymore."

These days, the president is busy arranging everything from retraining sessions
to suicide prevention classes. He has had to make himself an instant expert on a
subject he hates -- closing down a plant.

The other morning a man who has spent more than 20 years on the assembly line
took a chair in Mr. Harlow's small office at the union hall. "I have a
19-year-old retarded son," he said. "I can't move. I can't leave my son." What
were his chances of getting a job at a plant in the area?

Mr. Harlow, who is 46 years old and has four children of his own, was
sympathetic. But he couldn't offer any guarantees.

"All I can do is listen and tell them to get with their spouse and their
children and talk it through," he said after the man left. "Some people I try to
get into therapy. Families are in turmoil here. They don't know what's going to
happen. They're worried about money. And when there's problems with money, love
goes away."

Just because he is president of the local doesn't mean he can get answers from
the company. General Motors doesn't have all the answers either. A lot depends
on the economy and how many cars people buy. Willow Run is only one of 21 plants
that are destined to close by 1995 as the company struggles to recover from last
year's record $4.5 billion loss.

A Secretive Company

But General Motors is also famous for its secrecy. It announced last February
that because of overcapacity in the production of the Caprice and other large,
rear-wheel-drive cars that Willow Run was building, production would be
consolidated at Arlington. Sales of the Caprice were lagging badly. But the
company has refused to specify its reasons for choosing Arlington.

Reporters have been barred from Willow Run since before the announcement. A
request from this reporter to accompany Mr. Harlow on one of his regular visits
to the plant was refused.

The company has said that most of the workers, whose average seniority is 20
years, will get jobs at other plants. About 400 men and women are expected to
move to Arlington early next year. But it is still too soon to know who else
will go where, or when. Everyone will receive nearly their full income, and
benefits, until at least next September, when the current contract expires.

When Mr. Harlow ran for president four years ago, he had no idea he would be
presiding over the demise of the local. He had only hoped to clean it up --
Local 1776's then-president, Richard Debs, was packing a gun and operating
behind closed doors.

"It was very, very sleazy," said Jerry Clifton, the new bargaining chairman.

During the campaign Mr. Harlow spent his nights hiding out in his basement.
"Debs put out a contract on me," he said. The F.B.I., he said, had tipped him
off but said they didn't have enough evidence to offer him protection. So he
bought a gun.

Another of Mr. Debs's opponents, Jesse Gray, was shot in the neck as he drove
down the freeway to the plant. He had to retire on medical disability.

Mr. Debs is in prison for trying to hire two men to frighten Mr. Harlow out of
running against him. He was also convicted of another crime, the sexual assault
of a 12-year-old boy.

The local has cleared its name. Quality at the plant has been high. But the last
car will roll off the line at the plant sometime next year. And then, if what
happens in other plant closings is any precedent, Bob Harlow's local will be no
more. The one-story concrete union hall, where workers hold meetings and wedding
receptions, where Dolores LaFleur has had a job as a secretary for 24 years,
will probably shut its doors.

Last Feb. 3, Mr. Harlow and his wife, Kathy Kelsay, who is 32, had a baby,
Jonathan. On Feb. 24, the union president stood near a podium in the plant as a
General Motors vice president delivered the terrible news.

"It ate my gut out," Mr. Harlow said.

Mr. Evans, the financial secretary, said the stress took 20 pounds off Mr.
Harlow last spring.

But the other morning the president walked into the union hall singing a Motown
tune. He wore blue jeans, a U.A.W. polo shirt, running shoes and a tiny gold
replica of a Chevrolet around his neck. "We have to stay positive," he said.
Some things that help: Country music on the radio of his 1990 Caprice, bowling
Thursday nights with his buddies, walks with his children.

And he is hopeful. "We're still fighting to get another product in here," he
said. Another product is, of course, another car to build. "We tell everyone to
work hard and keep the quality high and show the company what we can do," he
said. But the company said its plans haven't changed.

Bob Harlow, one of nine children, grew up in Bartley, W. Va., a coal mining
town. "I wanted something more," he said, recalling his restlessness back in
1965, his senior year of high school.

So, over Christmas break, he and his best friend, Harold Dunston, got in
Harold's 1964 black Chevy and headed north, up Highway 23. They drove 500 miles
in less than nine hours, straight to Detroit, the Motor City. Who needed a high
school diploma? This was the industrial promised land, home of the Big Three --
General Motors, Ford and Chrysler.

On Feb. 10, 1965, Mr. Harlow went to work at the huge General Motors Willow Run
assembly plant here in Ypsilanti, 30 miles west of Detroit. He installed
convertible tops on Chevrolets, lifting each one onto the car with a hoist,
jumping into the back seat to bolt it down with an air gun, and then hopping out
fast enough to catch the next car. They were rolling at 62 an hour.

"I tell you what, it was so tiring I'd lay on my back on the floor on my break,"
Mr. Harlow said. "Sometimes I'd take my shirt off and wring it out." But no, he
said, he never thought of quitting. The pay was $2.57 an hour, with plenty of
overtime.

"We were working 10, 11 1/2 hours a day," he said. "I didn't know there was that
much money in the world. I was 18 years old, and I bought my first car -- a '57
Pontiac. I was working for General Motors. You think you're set. You think
everything's taken care of. I thought I had the world by the tail."

In 1967, along with scores of other young men from the plant, he went to
Vietnam. Two years later, back on the line, as a replacement operator, he met a
relief man named Randy Sinks, from Tennessee.

"It seemed like we were a team after that," Mr. Harlow said. "Randy was my best
friend."

Mr. Sinks, who was a benefits representative, died suddenly in May of a heart
attack. He had been mowing the lawn. He was 49 years old.

"I can't believe the stress over the plant closing didn't have something to do
with it," Mr. Harlow said. His eyes filled as he talked about how much he missed
his friend.

"I sent Bob to the doctor for a full examination after Randy died," Ms. Kelsay
said. "It's really scary when something like that happens to someone you know.
Randy was the same kind of person as Bob. Doesn't complain, easygoing -- or
appears to be easygoing."

Her husband and Jerry Clifton will be the last ones out the door after the
assembly line shuts down. That is how it works in plant closings. With his
seniority, Mr. Harlow, who spent 20 years making his way through the union
ranks, will get a job -- at another plant, or perhaps at Solidarity House,
U.A.W. headquarters in Detroit, though staff is being cut there, too.

"Bob was worried that people would blame him for the plant closing," Ms. Kelsay
said. Apparently they didn't. He was re-elected in April by a landslide.

Why run again when the plant is closing? Mr. Harlow's answer: "I wasn't
through."

NAME: Bob Harlow

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Closing Willow Run -- Second article of a series: A Union Official on
the Spot.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Harlow, right, president of the auto workers' Local 1776 in
Ypsilanti, Mich., bowling Monday with fellow auto workers, from left, Don
Keebler, John Burnett and Henry Tincher. The closing next year of the General
Motors Willow Run plant has left Mr. Harlow listening to the fears of his
members. (Peter Yates for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit); Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Bush, Statesman . . .

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


George Bush was not at a political rally in Pittsburgh or San Diego Monday when
he recalled his military career, backhandedly rebuking Bill Clinton for failing
to serve, and then proposed revamping U.S. foreign aid to create 40,000 new U.S.
jobs. No, he was plugging his own campaign in New York -- in a solemn speech
before the U.N. General Assembly, of all places.

Mr. Bush's odd sense of place should surprise no one. For a year and a half now,
almost everything he has done or not done abroad has been in direct service of
his own political ambitions at home.

The Foreign Policy President has turned into the grandest Domestic Politics
President on record, far outstripping his predecessors in subordinating national
interests to personal political interests. At times this practice has been so
blatant and so dismaying that even his own aides have been too embarrassed to
deny it.

General Schwarzkopf, who obviously likes Mr. Bush, says as much in his new book
about the Iraq war. The general maintains that unnamed White House officials
ended the rout of Iraqi forces at 100 hours because they "really knew how to
package an historic event." So Saddam Hussein -- Mr. Bush's Hitler -- was
allowed to slip off the hook at least in part to make the President look good.

George Bush canceled a long-planned visit to Japan last December after polls
showed the public thought he was spending too much time on foreign affairs.
Then, to salve Tokyo's hurt, he rescheduled the trip.

But against all State Department advice he brought along the heads of the Big
Three auto manufacturers, who largely created the gigantic trade deficit with
Japan, so he could pretend to be battling the Japanese for American jobs. Mr.
Bush's closest aides flinched privately over the spectacle of the President
bashing on bended knee.

The Foreign Policy President dawdled through six winter months over aid to the
ex-Soviet Union. Few Americans wanted or expected him to do much, because the
principal burden of reform must rest with the Russians themselves. But he did
nothing, for fear of being accused of squandering dollars on foreigners.

That is, he did nothing of consequence until his aides got word of an impending
Clinton aid proposal. They frantically stitched together a Bush plan, and the
President unceremoniously ran to the cameras an hour ahead of Mr. Clinton --
and, his aides admitted, without even knowing the cost to the American taxpayer.

Still stymied by presumed public unhappiness with foreign adventures, Mr. Bush
tried to ignore the Serbian slaughter of Bosnian Muslims. He hid behind the
patently phony argument that any strong action would quickly land the U.S. in a
Vietnam-style quagmire. Only recently did he begin to take the actions he spent
months dismissing. By then, through his fearful inaction, he had sacrificed
Bosnian lives and American leadership.

With little political incentive to please American blacks, Mr. Bush ignored
refugees and starvation in Haiti and Somalia. In so doing, he forfeited
America's moral leadership. For the first time since 1945, America has no moral
basis for urging humanitarianism on others, and cannot credibly importune
Europeans to care for refugees from Yugoslavia and Romania.

For no reason other than to gain votes in Texas, where F-16 fighters are
produced, Mr. Bush recently rushed to sell the aircraft to Taiwan. His decision
violated a solemn agreement with China -- thereby diminishing America's ability
to dissuade others from making questionable arms sales.

Only in the Mideast did Mr. Bush retain the mantle of statesmanship that he had
earned by organizing Desert Storm, escorting the Soviet Union away from
Communism and helping Germany to unite. By pressing Israel to stop West Bank
settlements, he lost votes at home. But by bringing about Arab-Israeli talks he
gained the respect of all -- until he yanked a reluctant James Baker, the force
behind the talks, out of the State Department and into the Presidential
campaign.

All Presidents play politics with foreign policy in election years. But to keep
his office Mr. Bush has, to an unprecedented degree, stroked the lesser
instincts of Americans -- and squandered America's credibility, moral leadership
and power.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

James A. Van Fleet, Leader In Korean War, Dies at 100

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1513 words


Gen. James A. Van Fleet, a foot soldier through nearly four decades in the Army
and a commander who led major campaigns in World War II and the Korean War, died
yesterday at his ranch in Polk City, Fla. He was 100 years old.

He died in his sleep, funeral home officials said.

General Van Fleet, who had been a machine-gunner in World War I, would later
play crucial roles in D-Day, in the Allied push into Germany and, after the war,
in repelling attempts by Communist guerrillas to take over Greece.

Calling him "the greatest general we have ever had," former President Harry S.
Truman said of the retiring general in 1953: "I sent him to Greece and he won
the war. I sent him to Korea and he won the war."

Throughout his career, the tall, blue-eyed four-star general had a reputation
for caring for and respecting even the privates in his command. "I never want to
command by fear," he once said. "I never want to be accused of abuse of power.
Power is given to you to exercise in a kindly way."

In 1951, during the Korean War, one subordinate officer told a reporter:
"General Van Fleet is a foot-slogger. He's a mud soldier and a foxhole soldier."


Not One for Subtlety

Never given to subtlety, General Van Fleet caused a stir in the closing days of
the Korean War when he told Congress that he had been held back from fully
pursuing the Communist forces.

Nine years after his retirement, during the early stages of the Vietnam War,
General Van Fleet was recalled to active duty by President John F. Kennedy to
serve as a consultant to the Defense Department and a specialist in guerrilla
warfare. Once again, he caused controversy when a newspaper quoted him the day
before his appointment as saying that Ambassador Adlai E. Stevenson should be
dismissed as chief delegate to the United Nations because he had not supported
the invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.

James Alward Van Fleet was born in New Jersey on March 19, 1892, a son of
William and Medora Van Fleet. General Van Fleet's father had served in the Union
Army during the Civil War. His grandfather Joshua served in the New York militia
during the Revolutionary War. When James was an infant, his family moved to
Florida where, when he reached school age, he was enrolled in the Summerlin
Institute at Bartow.

He was appointed to the United States Military Academy in 1911, and graduated
with the class of 1915, which included future Gens. Omar N. Bradley and Dwight
D. Eisenhower. In his senior year, Cadet Van Fleet played fullback on the
undefeated Army team. Even in midlife, General Van Fleet, who stood well over 6
feet, retained much of the easy grace of his football days. Like Generals
Bradley and Eisenhower, General Van Fleet was not an exceptional student. Upon
graduation from West Point, he stood 92d in a class of 168.

After infantry company duty during a tense period on the Mexican border in 1916,
then-Lieutenant Van Fleet was an instructor at a temporary officers' school at
Fort Leavenworth, Kan. After machine-gun training at two camps in the South, he
went to France as a captain and received command of the 17th Machine Gun
Battalion of the 6th Division. In the rugged infantry fighting during the
Meuse-Argonne offensive in October 1918, he was wounded in action near Sedan
several days before the war ended on Nov. 11.

Peacetime Service

General Van Fleet's service in the ill-equipped peacetime army of the 1920's
included assignments to Reserve Officer Training Corps units in several state
colleges. For several years, he was commandant of cadets and head football coach
at the University of Florida. He was returned to field service in 1925 as a
battalion commander with the 42d Infantry in the Panama Canal Zone.

After another tour of duty at the University of Florida, a tour with the Fifth
Infantry at Fort Williams, Me., and duty lasting from 1935 to 1939 with the
Organized Reserve at San Diego, Calif., General Van Fleet joined the 29th
Infantry at Fort Benning, Ga. With War War II looming, it was a time of intense
training.

General Van Fleet was only a colonel commanding an infantry regiment in England
when the Normandy landings were being planned. The story was circulated at the
time that Gen. George C. Marshall, the Army Chief of Staff, had confused Colonel
Van Fleet with an officer who had a similar name and who was known to be a heavy
drinker, refusing him promotion on those grounds. General Van Fleet never drank
alcohol.

The future general was commanding the 8th Infantry of the 4th Division when
assignments were being made for the Normandy landings. General Bradley had
served with the 8th and knew its fighting strengths, and he had considerable
respect for the tactical skill of its commander. The 8th was selected for the
tough zero-hour assault on Omaha Beach. General Van Fleet took his men ashore
with such skill that the combat team's objectives were obtained with a minimum
loss of lives.

Soon after, the General got his first star as assistant division commander of
the 2d Division. When the command of the 90th Division opened, General Bradley
said, "I'll take Van" for the job.

From Feb. 4 to March 15, 1945, General Van Fleet commanded the 3d Corps, and was
on hand for the crossing of the Rhine River at the bridge at Remagen. His corps
spearheaded the drive across Germany and on the last day of the war in Europe,
he was at the foot of the Austrian Alps.

After a routine tour of duty in the United States at the end of the war, General
Van Fleet was named Deputy Chief of Staff at the headquarters of the European
Command of the United States Army.

The postwar threat of Communist invasion of Greece, coupled with extensive
disorders in the country itself, led to intervention. General Van Fleet was
selected as director of the Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning
Group in Greece. He assumed the post on Feb. 19, 1950. His direct manner, his
complete lack of political subtlety proved to be advantageous in a setting where
politics and factionalism were creating chaos.

A group of officers under General Van Fleet began the difficult task of training
the Greeks and instilling in them a sense of unity. Slowly the communists were
driven across the border.

Command in Korean War

On July 31, 1950, with the Greek situation relatively stabilized, General Van
Fleet was given command of the 1st Army with headquarters at Fort Meade, Md. He
was there in 1951 when General Douglas MacArthur of the Army was relieved of
command of United Nations forces in the Korean War. Lieut. Gen. Matthew B.
Ridgway, who had been field commander of the United Nations forces, assumed
General MacArthur's post, and General Van Fleet took over as field commander.

General Van Fleet arrived in Korea on April 14, 1951, eight days before the
Communists began the first of their last two broad offensives. The attack was
repulsed. The second attack, on May 16, was also turned back.

General Van Fleet started a counteroffensive in June. Later, testifying before a
Senate Armed Services subcommittee in Washington, he declared that the Allies
could have won then. But the communists called for peace talks, to which
President Truman agreed.

For the next two years, the armistice negotiations dragged on while both sides
dug in. An armistice was finally negotiated in the summer of 1953.

In the 1952 Presidential campaign, General Van Fleet became the central figure
in a political storm. General Eisenhower, campaigning on the Republican ticket,
had read in a speech a letter General Van Fleet had written in which he
complained that he lacked official support for his program of training and using
South Korean soldiers in combat. The Defense Department denied that there had
been any holding back in the training of Koreans for combat.

General Van Fleet retired from the Army on March 31, 1953, in accordance with
the law. He had served for nearly 38 years as an officer and was 61 years old.

Prior to his official retirement, General Van Fleet testified on the Korean
situation before a Senate Armed Services subcommittee. Besides saying that he
had been prohibited from waging a victorious offensive, he declared that his
forces had been handicapped by shortages of ammunition during all his 22 months
in Korea.

General Van Fleet's only son, Captain James A. Van Fleet Jr., an Air Force
pilot, was reported missing in action in Korean in April 1952, after a night
bombing mission. In 1954, Captain Van Fleet was declared presumed dead.

After retirement, General Van Fleet devoted himself to business pursuits, mainly
in real estate. He was president of James A. Van Fleet Estates Inc. and of Van
Fleet Properties Inc., and was a director of Webb & Knapp Inc., Van Pelt
International Industries and 20th Century Fox film corporation. He was also
chairman of the American Korean Foundation. He was a recipient of the
Distinguished Service Cross with three oak leaf clusters and numerous other
decorations.

General Van Fleet is to buried at Arlington National Cemetery on Wednesday.

NAME: James A. Van Fleet

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 26, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An obituary article on Thursday about Gen. James A. Van Fleet misstated the site
of his D-day landing in Normandy. The landing, in which the general's skills
were credited with keeping casualties relatively light, was at Utah Beach, not
Omaha Beach.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. James A. Van Fleet at his 100th birthday party last March
in Polk City, Fla. (Reuters); General Van Fleet, right, commander of the
American Eighth Army, with President-elect Dwight D. Eisenhower and Gen. Mark
Clark, left, Far East commander, somewehere in Korea in 1952. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words



International     A3-10

GREATER CURRENCY RISKS

As the volume of currency trading has soared in recent years, the ability of the
world's leading economies to defend their currencies on foreign markets has
slipped markedly, according to figures released by the Fed and other central
banks.  A1

DARKNESS IN SARAJEVO

Electricity and water are in short supply in the besieged Bosnian capital. When
dusk falls, thousands are cast back into a 19th-century world of candles and oil
lamps. Bathing is difficult, and contaminated drinking water is causing illness.
A10

Yugoslavia's leader is at odds with those who named him.  A10

MISSING AMERICANS: VIETNAM WAR

The Secretary of Defense when American troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in
1973 said the Pentagon believed that some prisoners might have remained in Laos,
contrary to President Nixon's statement that all were heading home.  A8

MISSING AMERICANS: KOREAN WAR

Documents from Soviet archives say that Stalin advised Communist leaders in
China and Korea to hold back some captured American pilots as bargaining chips.
A10

Fighting has intensified between Armenia and Azerbaijan.  A10

IN DEFENSE OF EUROPE

Prime Minister Major of Britain told the House of Commons that Britain was
committed to closer European union. But he said the details of monetary and
political cooperation needed more deliberation.  A3

BONN DEFENDS ITSELF

The disarray in Europe reached the point that the German Government was forced
to deny assertions that it is part of a secret campaign with Paris to push
European union over their neighbors' objections.  A3

CLOCK TICKS ON IN BRAZIL

In a blow to President Collor's hopes of avoiding impeachment, Brazil's Supreme
Court has denied him more time for his defense and ruled that the impeachment
vote in congress may be open, not secret.  A5

ANOTHER MIDEAST ROUND ENDS

As the sixth round of peace talks ended in Washington, Israeli and Arab
negotiators had inched a bit closer to one another but had made no substantive
breakthroughs.  A6

IRAQ BENDS A BIT

Apparently softening Baghdad's position, the Iraqi Foreign Minister said his
Government had no objection to a new United Nations' relief operation to help
Kurds in northern Iraq get through the winter.  A6

THE $4 MILLION ANSWER IN JAPAN

Japan's most influential politician was said to be preparing an admission that
he received $4 million in illegal contributions from a company linked to
mobsters.  A9

Santo Domingo Journal: A Columbus celebration fizzles.  A4

National     A12-20

CLINTON EXPANDS HEALTH PLAN

Bill Clinton expanded on his universal health care proposal, saying he would
require private employers to provide health insurance and would have the Federal
Government supplement health-care protection for the unemployed.  A1

A CAROLINA POLITICAL DIVIDE

Governor Clinton is making the Republicans work hard in North Carolina, where
the crucial question is:Will Mr. Bush be hurt more by a flat economy and a tax
increase, or will Mr. Clinton be hurt more by social issues and questions about
his character.  A19

PROBLEMS FOR BUSH AD TEAM

Despite the high hopes for the first Republican attack ad, the campaign's
revamped advertising team has inherited serious problems that could frustrate
efforts of its Madison Avenue executives, who are better known for selling
automobiles than Presidents.  A19

LATE TRIBUTE TO AN OUTSIDER

A woman who survived attacks from the Good Ol' Boy establishment and defeated
six men in a Congressional primary in Georgia is now finding the checkbooks of
that establishment opening to her.  A18

HARSH CRITIQUE OF NAVY INQUIRY

A Pentagon report says senior Navy officials deliberately undermined their
inquiry into sexual abuse of women at a naval aviators convention to avoid
negative publicity.  A1

BUSH ACCEPTS A TEST BAN

As part of a deal to win financing for an $8 billion research project in Texas,
President Bush has accepted curbs on underground nuclear testing, and both
houses passed the legislation last night.  A1

NEW AGE ON TRIAL

A divorce case involving a woman who says she is the medium for the spirit of a
35,000-year-old warrior has in ways put the entire New Age movement of the
1980's on trial.  A1

VOTE TO SAVE FAMILY-LEAVE BILL

The Senate voted to override President Bush's veto of the family-leave bill, but
the House delayed action as the Democratic leadership took on the challenge of
rounding up the votes it would need.  A16

BUSH AND ARMS SALES

A figure in the Iran-contra affair said he believed President Bush was more
involved in the arms-for-hostages deals with Iran than has been acknowledged.
A12


MAYOR BRADLEY WON'T RUN AGAIN

Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles announced today that he would not seek a sixth
term next year after two decades that have seen the transformation of Los
Angeles into one of the world's major cities.  A12

BLACK INCOME GAP WIDENS

The gulf between haves and have-nots has grown wider in the black population,
with fewer families earning middle-range incomes.A12

SON-PARENT DIVORCE TRIAL

A 12-year-old boy who wants to choose who will be his parents began a trial that
could substantially alter the legal rights of children and broaden the debate
over the structure of contemporary families.  A20

Kentucky court overturned sodomy law.  A13

Law Page   B16

Metro Digest   B1

RETHINKING HOMELESS POLICY

News analysis: Mayor Dinkins's new strategy on homelessness effectively
acknowledges that his initial policy had the effect of encouraging many people
to declare themselves homeless -- and that a new system was needed to insure
only the truly homeless were served.  A1

Weekend   C1-34

Sports   B8-13

Obituaries   A21-22

Editorials/Op-Ed  A32-33
Editorials
The Perot tease.
George Bush's stall on debates.
The cemetery called East Timor.
Topics: No litmus test needed.
Letters
A. M. Rosenthal: Hello again, suckers.
Anthony Lewis: The Bush Constitution.
Curtis Moore: Bush's nonsense on jobs and the environment.

Business Digest   D1

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

EX-OFFICIAL CITES DOUBT ON P.O.W.'S

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


Elliot L. Richardson, Secretary of Defense when American troops were withdrawn
from Vietnam in 1973, said today that the Pentagon believed that some prisoners
of war might have remained in neighboring Laos, contrary to a statement by
President Nixon that all the prisoners were on their way home.

Mr. Richardson, who was Defense Secretary for four months between the signing of
the Paris peace agreement on Jan. 27, 1973, and his appointment as Attorney
General in May, told the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs that
he could only speculate why Mr. Nixon told Americans on March 29, 1973, that
"all our American P.O.W.'s are on their way home."

Mr. Richardson conjectured that politics may have been a consideration in the
President's decision to say all the prisoners were returning when the Pentagon
was producing tallies of possible prisoners. Or the White House may have tried
to avoid raising false hopes among relatives.

"Whatever made the considerations, somebody could rationalize the distinction
between the basis of this number and the basis for his statement," Mr.
Richardson said when shown the Pentagon tallies. "But how it actually came
about, for all I know he deliberately chose to lie. But I try to give him the
benefit of the doubt."

Earlier in the week, two other former Defense Secretaries, Melvin R. Laird and
James R. Schlesinger, both indicated that they believed there was a possibility
that some Americans were left behind. But former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger said that while it was possible that some of those unaccounted for at
the end of the war might have been prisoners, there was no hard evidence to
support that, and that if any officials believed there were prisoners, they
never said that to him.

Memo Called for Diplomacy

Mr. Richardson said today, "The Defense Department was doing everything, in
effect, that was in our power to track down additional P.O.W.'s." A Pentagon
memorandum to the White House recommending a diplomatic offensive on the issue
was apparently ignored, several officials said today.

Mr. Richardson was dismissed as Attorney General by Mr. Nixon in the "Saturday
night massacre" of October 1973, after refusing to dismiss the Watergate
prosecutor, Archibald Cox.

As classified documents from the White House, Pentagon and State Department have
been released over the last few months at the request of the committee,
attention has gradually centered on Laos, a poor nation dominated by Vietnam
since the end of French rule in Indochina in 1954. For more than a decade, the
Central Intelligence Agency ran a "secret war" in Laos, arming anti-Communist
tribal people and Thai irregulars.

In 1973, the Defense Intelligence Agency listed more than 350 Americans as
missing or prisoners of war in Laos. By the end of March, 591 prisoners had been
returned by Hanoi. Only nine of them were captured in Laos.

On the day before President Nixon told a national television audience that all
the prisoners were coming home from Indochina, Mr. Richardson had sent a
memorandum to Mr. Kissinger, then national security adviser, saying he was
"concerned over the situation in Laos regarding our men who are still being held
prisoner or missing."

Military Threat Urged

In the memo, Mr. Richardson recommended that Hanoi and the Laotians be
threatened with renewed military action to demonstrate that "the U.S. will no
longer play games with the P.O.W. issue in Laos."

Testifying today with Mr. Richardson was Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, who helped
write a position paper on the Laos prisoner issue addressed to the Defense
Secretary as well as the memo to Mr. Kissinger.

Mr. Secord said that based on the number of American planes shot down over Laos
and the number of crewmen known to have survived crashes, it would have been
"absurd" not to expect 20 to 40 more Americans to have come home from Laos.

He said there was enough evidence, including photographs of prisoners, to know
with "a high degree of certitude" that Americans were in captivity.

The United States, which did not have a separate peace treaty with Laos, held
Hanoi responsible for the return of prisoners captured by the Communist Pathet
Lao.

'Not Absolutely Certain'

When Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the
committee, asked Mr. Richardson whether he would concur that a statement saying
all prisoners were coming home was incorrect, the former Attorney General
replied, "Yes."

"We had reason to believe there were additional prisoners of war in the hands of
the Laotians," Mr. Richardson said. Then, echoing the earlier testimony of Mr.
Laird and Mr. Schlesinger, he added: "We were not absolutely certain. We did not
have definitive information as to the numbers."

Several panels of witnesses from the Nixon Administration told the Senate
committtee that the antiwar mood of the United States made any military action
unlikely, however.


LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The General;
Schwarzkopf Says 2 Camps Courted Him

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf says the campaigns of Gov. Bill Clinton and Ross
Perot both sounded him out about running for Vice President.

Opening a promotional tour for his new book, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," with an
interview with Barbara Walters to be broadcast Friday on the ABC News program
"20/20," the former commander of allied forces in the Persian Gulf war said in a
transcript of the interview that he turned down the overtures because he is
"apolitical."

"I do not want to be a pawn in a political campaign," the retired four-star
general said, adding that the longer the current campaign goes on, the happier
he is that he has no political aspirations.

When asked about General Schwartzkopf's recollection, spokesmen for the Perot
organization and the Clinton campaign laughed. Then they called back to announce
that they would have no comment on whether it was true.

Sharon Holman, spokeswoman for the five-month-old Perot organization, said,
"Traditionally, we don't comment on private discussions."

Comment From Bush Camp

But Torie Clarke, press secretary for the Bush campaign, was happy to offer a
comment. "It just goes to show that Clinton and Perot have a tremendous amount
of respect and admiration for the men serving under President Bush," she said.
"And by association, they must have a fair dose of respect for the President's
handling of the Persian Gulf crisis."

General Schwarzkopf has gone out of his way to say nice things about Mr. Bush
this year without formally endorsing him. In the interview, he said he had
always tried to stay out of politics.

Then he offered some distinctly political, if bipartisan, observations about
some of the 1992 candidates.

The general, a career Army man who served two tours of combat in Vietnam,
repeated an earlier comment that he has doubts about Governor Clinton becoming
Commander in Chief because he avoided the draft in the Vietnam War. But he also
said he had the same "little bit of knee-jerk concern" about Vice President Dan
Quayle and even about his former boss, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who was
exempted from the draft because he had children.

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Bush Ad Strikes, but Problems Loom

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


To the relief of gloomy Republican advertising connoisseurs, Bush campaign
officials this week finally broadcast a television commercial that they thought
might actually help their cause.

But it takes more than one good commercial to sell a product -- or a President
-- to a public that is looking at the new brand on the market. And despite the
high hopes for this ad, the campaign's revamped advertising team has inherited
serious problems that could frustrate efforts of its Madison Avenue executives,
who are better known for selling automobiles than Presidents.

The commercial was the Bush campaign's first effort in this campaign to throw an
electronic mud pie at Gov. Bill Clinton, but the bashing of the Democratic
Presidential nominee as a big taxer and big spender was made digestible with
humor.

Although the script was kicking around long before Sig Rogich was summoned back
to the campaign a week or so ago from his post as Ambassador to Iceland, the
advertisement is covered with his fingerprints: It hits Mr. Clinton hard, but it
has memorable touches like the Governor moving in fast forward with hillbilly
music playing in the background. Bush aides were so enthusiastic about the ad
that they took the rare step of inviting reporters to their headquarters here
for a preview.

Biggest Obstacle Is Time

Democrats attacked the ad as misleading, but no one was saying it was not
effective.

But obstacles loom over Mr. Rogich, a former Las Vegas advertising executive.
The biggest is time; many of the Bush commercials produced before he arrived
need to be redone or scrapped, and it is unusual for a campaign to have to come
up with many new ads so late in the game.

Some Bush officials also said they were concerned that the campaign frittered
away money by placing national advertisements on the networks instead of the
more efficient approach used by the Clinton campaign of targeting ads to
specific battleground states, where television commercials are far less
expensive. Republican officials said that by buying national advertising, the
campaign was seeking to increase support for Mr. Bush around the country before
buying local ads. The problem is that the President's support has not
significantly risen.

The campaign's media experts are also debating just how negative their
commercials should be, and whether attack ads should focus on Mr. Clinton's
economic record in Arkansas, like the advertisement shown on Wednesday, or on
more personal issues, like his draft record.

Mr. Rogich, a former Bush image-maker who was Ambassador for only 114 days
before being summoned back by James A. Baker 3d, the new White House chief of
staff, to coordinate the advertising effort, played down the time constraints
and insisted that the effort was on track.

"You can't plan months and months out because things do change," he said. "I'm
very comfortable that we'll be able to provide the support in the advertising
end for the President without missing anything."

But the job of injecting order and aggressiveness quickly in an ad team that was
criticized as uninspired can be daunting.

"You had a huge bureaucratic operation that needed to be streamlined," said Don
Sipple, a Republican consultant who worked for the Bush campaign earlier this
year. "But time is short. The campaign was way behind the curve as far as
producing stuff."

Even Mr. Rogich has not had a chance to get a handle on all the unfinished ads
on his desk. In an interview, he said he had never heard of a commercial that
the campaign filmed earlier this month featuring Adrian Cronauer, the disk
jockey portrayed by Robin Williams in the movie "Good Morning Vietnam,"
attacking Mr. Clinton on the draft.

There is an inherent friction on the Bush campaign between political types who
think they understand advertising and ad executives who think they understand
politics, and Mr. Rogich's job is to smooth relations between the two sides.

"You'd have hours of meetings with these guys," one Bush official said of the
Madison Avenue contingent, "and they'd come back at the end of the day and say
they hadn't been given clear direction."

But the executives said they never got clear marching orders. "Everybody's
running in different directions," said Sean Fitzpatrick, the creator of
Chevrolet's successful "Heartbeat of America" commercial who quit the Bush ad
team last month. He would write scripts, he said, but never get a response from
the campaign hierarchy.

"I never got any answer," Mr. Fitzpatrick said in an interview. "We called it
the black hole."

The black hole appears to have been filled. Mr. Baker signed off on the attack
ad, campaign officials did, and Mr. Bush agreed to the concept.

Mr. Rogich signaled that he is not hesitant about stepping up the attack in
coming days. But like most ad people, he prefers terms like "comparative" to
"negative."

"It's fair game to be comparative," he said. "There's a reason we keep records:
to compare them to the opposition. We just have to be absolutely certain that we
are honest in our presentation."

But campaign officials concede that the test ahead is how they proceed with the
sensitive issue of attack advertising: How much stronger do they criticize Mr.
Clinton? And on what issues?

"The biggest danger is not doing it right," said Doug Watts, the advertising
director for President Ronald Reagan's re-election campaign in 1984. "You only
get so many shots with the cream pie. And if you take a lot of wild, flailing
shots and they don't hit the mark, then of course you're very suspect."

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Pulse -- North Carolina;
Presidential Race in North Carolina: Fierce Fight Across Cultural Divide

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.C., Sept. 23


The talk turned to family values, and Representative David E. Price, seeking to
score a partisan point, told his audience, "You'd think if the President was so
interested in keeping families together, he'd be willing to support time off for
new mothers."

With that, a tall man in the back row jumped to his feet and said: "Family
values got nothing to do with economics. It's whether you teach your children to
love the Lord."

The exchange took place a week or so ago at a "town meeting" held in a Raleigh
school by Mr. Price, a Democrat, and he said it summed up for him the cultural
divide in North Carolina politics. It also encapsulates a crucial dimension of
the contest here between President Bush and Bill Clinton: will Mr. Bush be hurt
more by a flat economy and a tax increase, or will Mr. Clinton be hurt more by
social issues and questions about his character?

When the President flew into Greensboro on Wednesday, the Arkansas Governor held
a narrow lead in the public polls. But the Republican advertising campaign is
just starting, in a state noted for tough, negative, effective Republican
television blitzes, with ads that have made the Willie Horton broadside of 1988
look as benign as a gauzy A.T. & T. commercial. Although the Democrats are more
hopeful here than at any time since 1976, several of them, used to losing, said
this week they thought Mr. Bush might yet eke out a victory.

Yearning for Tomorrow

"I wish the election were tomorrow," said Nick Galifianakis, a former Democratic
Representative who lost a bruising Senate battle to Jesse Helms in 1972.
"They're masters at trashing us at the 11th hour. They play on people's
emotions, get them to think, 'Maybe we shouldn't take a chance on someone we
don't know,' and I'm afraid they'll do that to Clinton."

Still, Mr. Clinton has a solid chance, and he is making the Republicans work
hard for North Carolina, which is now the nation's 10th most populous state,
with 14 electoral votes. In the South, only Texas and Florida, both special
political cases, are bigger, which has made this state a major 1992
battleground. Wednesday's visit by Mr. Bush was the 16th of the campaign by a
Presidential or Vice-Presidential nominee or one of their spouses.

If Mr. Clinton wins North Carolina, he will probably be the next President,
because what it takes for a Democrat to win here is what it takes for a Democrat
to win nationally -- a strong appeal to rural and suburban whites, still nominal
Democrats, who usually vote Republican. As it has grown, the state has become
more like traditional swing states in the Middle West, such as Ohio and
Michigan, and less an exotic political landscape.

Middle America, in other words, has moved South.

"Clearly, there are a lot of registered Democrats who have voted
Reagan-Reagan-Bush-Helms-Helms who are once again available to the Democratic
candidates, and there are lots of women and younger voters among the Republicans
and independents who are back in play," said Harrison Hickman, a Democratic
poll-taker working this year for Senator Terry Sanford, who is seeking
re-election, and Jim Hunt, the party's candidate for Governor.

A Novelty No More

Compared with Jimmy Carter in 1976, Mr. Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore,
will probably benefit relatively little from a Southern cousin vote this year,
because the novelty of a Southerner seeking the Presidency has dissipated. But
Mr. Clinton has succeeded in repositioning himself and his party as moderates of
the kind that often win local races in this region.

"He's running a Southern governor's race writ large," said Ferrel Guillory, the
Southern correspondent for The News and Observer in Raleigh. "He learned in
Little Rock how to wend his way through the thickets of our politics, how to
hold the black vote without alienating the whites, how to target spending in
such a way that people think it helps them directly.

"That's got him in the game here, though he won't necessarily win."

Jack Hawke, the Republican state chairman, said the Democrats had gotten a two-
or three-week jump in the campaign with what he called "the best convention
operation I've ever seen, nominating two Southerners, both perceived as
moderates, and grabbing terrific media attention with that bus trip, a very
clever idea."

But he said Mr. Bush had come back strongly and might even be narrowly ahead, at
least partly because the state's economy was better than most and Mr. Bush's
troubles on that topic were less of a liability here. North Carolina, he said,
has the lowest unemployment figures of any big state.

'A Third-World Economy'

Democrats said they doubted that people here were satisfied with their economic
lot. Bill Green, a longtime campaign adviser to Senator Sanford, argued that
"people in eastern Carolina, a lot of them Reagan Democrats, know they're living
in a third-world economy, and they want to change that." Others noted that even
with high employment, the state has a relatively low median income because of
low pay levels in key industries like textiles.

Mr. Clinton has probably been hurt more here than in other states by the
controversy over his draft status during the Vietnam War and by his ambiguous
stand on the Persian Gulf war.  North Carolina is home to six major military
installations, including Fort Bragg, base of the 82d Airborne Division, and it
has always had a hawkish and patriotic tradition.

"We sent more troops to Desert Storm than any other state," said Mr. Hawke, "and
people know that Clinton's support for them was lukewarm."

Mr. Sanford voted against the gulf war resolution, and that issue will certainly
be kept front and center by his Republican opponent, Lauch Faircloth, who is
backed by the Congressional Club, Mr. Helms's potent fund-raising organization.
There are widespread reports here, however, that the club has not been able to
pull in as much money as needed with Mr. Helms ailing and less active and his
own name absent from the ballot.

Carter Wrenn, the head of the Congressional Club, said he anticipated a close
Presidential race, with neither candidate even approaching 60 percent of the
total vote. But he asserted that "the President has come back right much down
here" after a slow start.  The main reason, he said, is that "Southerners know
all about these slick-talking Democrats like Clinton, who try to quack and walk
like something else, and they don't like them."

The Republicans' appeal to the religious right at their Houston convention,
which jarred so many in Chicago and San Francisco and New York, played well
among conservative Southern Baptist voters here, said Thad Beyle, a professor of
political science at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, though
many of them may have been Republican loyalists already.

Representative Price, a Baptist lay preacher who once served as Democratic state
chairman, said that cultural and social issues such as abortion and homosexual
rights "could still drive a wedge into the Democratic electorate, as they have
in the past." But in this year's campaign, he argued, most voters are "fixated
on economic issues, which includes health care and education, and less willing
to be diverted from them."

"They're pressing all the hot buttons," he said of the Republicans, "but so far,
they don't seem to be getting the response they expect."

Recent private polling for the Democrats sustains that view. It also shows a
sharp upward trend since the Houston convention in Clinton support among women,
especially politically independent women, who were apparently offended by
attacks on Hillary Clinton that many took as veiled assaults on working women.
And it shows Mr. Clinton well ahead of the President among voters who describe
themselves as moderate, a group that voted solidly for Mr. Bush in 1988.

Three closely watched House races, in addition to the contests for the
governorship and Mr. Sanford's senate seat, may help to swell the turnout, and
that may aid Mr. Clinton. Two of the House races involve blacks -- Eva Clayton
in east Carolina and Mel Watt in the center of the state, both of whom are
expected to win -- and the third is taking place in the marginal district in the
western mountains.


LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In North Carolina, now a major campaign battleground, the
Republicans' appeal to the religious right played well among conservative
Southern Baptist voters, some of whom attended services at the Calvary Baptist
Church in Winston-Salem. The state is also home to six major military
installations and has a hawkish and patriotic tradition. Two soldiers shopped
for a car in Fort Bragg. (Photographs by Wade Spees for The New York Times)

Graphs: "Southern Swing State"

Though North Carolina is home to the high-tech corridors of the New South,
social and cultural issues remain important. It has sent Jesse Helms,
standard-bearer for traditional morality, to the Senate since 1972, and the
Republicans' best hope for picking up a Senate seat this year could be
displacing Terry Sanford, who voted aginst the Persain Gulf war resolution.

Population

                                   1980                1990
Total                         5,881,766           6,628,637
White                             75.8%               75.6%
Black                             22.4%               22.0%
Other                              1.8%                2.5%
Hispanic origin                    1.0%                1.2%


People pf Hispanic origin can be of any race.
Numbers may not add up to 100% because of rounding.

Registered Voters

                                   1988                1992
Total                         3,432,042           3,527,187
Democrats                         65.5%               62.1%
Republicans                       29.6%               31.6%
Unaffiliated or                    4.9%                6.3%
other


How North Carolina Has Voted in Presidential Elections

1976
   Ford: 44.2%
   Carter: 55.2%

1980
   Reagan: 49.3%
   Carter: 47.2%

1984
   Reagan: 61.9%
   Mondale: 37.9%

1988
   Bush: 58.0%
   Dukakis: 41.7%

Per Capita Income

1991 figures are the most recent available and are not adjusted for inflation.

1988
   N.C.: $14,567
   U.S.: $16,853

1991
   N.C.: $16,618
   U.S.: $19,092

Unemployment

August 1988
   N.C.: 3.3%
   U.S.: 5.5%

August 1992
   N.C.: 6.2%
   U.S.: 7.8%

(Sources: Census Bureau; North Carolina Board of Elections; America Votes; North
Carolina LAbor Department; U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic
Analysis; U.S. Labor Department, Bureau of Labor Statistics)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

2 Held in Scheme to Cheat Wary Lottery Winner

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


When a refugee from Vietnam who lives in Queens won $8.3 million in the New York
lottery last February, he expressed fear that he would soon be victimized by
people trying to steal his winnings and said he did not want his winning
publicized. He was apparently right.

Two men were charged yesterday in an elaborate scheme to steal $180,000 in from
Xuan Lien's winnings. One suspect is a retired police officer. The other is an
auxiliary police officer in Chinatown.

Prosecutors said the two men approached him and warned him that someone had a
$180,000 murder contract on his life and that he could escape if he paid them
off. At first, he gave them $88,000. But when they came back for $60,000 more on
Wednesday, the police swooped in and arrested them. The suspects were identified
yesterday in Criminal Court in Manhattan as Kevin M. Butler, who retired on
disability seven years ago, and Chung Yee Choi, an auxiliary officer in
Chinatown and a lower East Side storeowner.

Back in February, Mr. Lien, a retired 63-year-old salesman who settled with his
large family in Elmhurst, Queens, was one of three winners who shared a $25
million prize. He had purchased his winning ticket in a store on Canal Street, a
short walk from Mr. Choi's store. He was so sure his new riches would become a
target that he requested that his good fortune receive as little publicity as
possible.

But his name and hometown were announced, as is required by state lottery rules.
And on April 10, Mr. Butler and Mr. Choi approached him with what Manhattan
prosecutors said yesterday was an untrue claim that there was a murder contract
on his life and that they had "bought it off" for $180,000, according to the
authorities.

They told Mr. Lien that the murder contract also applied to one of his children
and that he had to pay up to save their lives. He gave the two men $88,000 and
agreed to pay the rest later.

Instead, Mr. Lien and his son David called detectives, who told them to go ahead
with another $60,000 payment that had already been scheduled to made on
Wednesday.

The police said yesterday that Mr. Butler was arrested on Wednesday at the
corner of Cherry and Pike Streets when he took the $60,000 from Mr. Lien. Mr.
Choi, 36, of 257 Clinton Street, was arrested moments later in the Thuan Hung
Produce Market, a store he operated at 47 Christie Street.

Mr. Butler, who is 45 years old and lives at 315 Avenue A, retired in 1985 on a
disability claim after serving 12 years on the force. His last assignment was in
the 13th Precinct.

Mr. Butler was held in $10,000 bail and Mr. Choi in $35,000 bail at their
arraignment yesterday afternoon on charges of grand larceny and conspiracy.

Law-enforcement officials said it was not known last night how Mr. Butler and
Mr. Choi came to know each other. Both Mr. Choi and Mr. Lien were of Chinese
descent but were natives of Vietnam.

They said they had some difficulty in interviewing Mr. Lien because he spoke
very little English. Through his sons, David and Steven, they said, the father
was able to communicate to them his concerns for his fortune.

But William Murray, counsel to the state lottery, said state law required the
announcement of a winner's name and hometown on the ground that public funds
were involved. He said that the announcements did not include home addresses and
that winners were not required to appear at news conferences or have their
photographs released to news organizations.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. John A. Collins, 58, Educator Who Led Change in Transfusions

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


Dr. John A. Collins, a medical educator who led an Army research team in Vietnam
that made a significant change in blood transfusion practices for casualties,
died on Monday. He was 58 years old and lived in Stanford, Calif.

He died of a heart attack while playing golf on vacation in County Galway,
Ireland, his family said.

Dr. Collins was a professor at the Stanford University School of Medicine, the
chairman of its surgery department from 1977-88 and a surgeon at its hospital.

During the war, he and his colleagues studied shock and blood chemistry in
wounded soldiers. Until then, the practice was to administer alkalinizing
solution to balance accumulated acidity in stored blood and to reverse acidosis
produced by injury.

But the team's study of 450 patients showed that despite injury, the body on its
own neutralizes acid in the blood and protects against acidosis. Further, the
research found that administering alkalinizing solution was harmful as well as
unnecessary.

The findings changed medical practice, which eliminated the alkalinizing
solution.

Dr. Collins's work won awards from the Army, the American Association of Blood
Banks and the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.

Dr. Collins was born in the Bronx. He graduated from Fordham University in 1955
and the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons in 1959. He was a captain in
the Army.

Surviving are his wife of 32 years, the former Mary Maureen Sheil; four sons,
Michael, of San Francisco, Owen,of Mountain View, Calif., John P., of Los Altos
Hills, Calif., and Matthew, of University City, Mo.; a brother, Joseph Collins
of New York City, and a sister, Margaret Collins of Indianapolis.


NAME: John A. Collins

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News;
Persistence Pays Off: Jerrold Lewis Nadler

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 892 words


Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler's introduction to politics came when he was 7 years
old and his father, "a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat," was a struggling poultry
farmer in New Jersey.

"I started becoming politicized when I was growing up because there were two
names that were never pronounced except with disdain," recalled Mr. Nadler, who
on Wednesday night won the Democratic nomination for Congress from a distinctly
urban district that stretches from the Upper West Side to Coney Island.

"One was Dwight D. Eisenhower, and the other was Ezra Taft Benson, his Secretary
of Agriculture. I didn't know what they did, but whatever they did made it
impossible for chicken farmers to produce eggs without losing money."

Mr. Nadler's father eventually lost the farm, the family decamped to Brooklyn
and Mr. Nadler wound up as a student at Columbia University protesting the
Vietnam War. Now he is virtually assured of election by his overwhelmingly
Democratic constituency, many of whom didn't like Ike either, but today favor
free-range chickens, fret about their cholesterol and, he says, "wouldn't know
Ezra Taft Benson."

Nagging in a Good Cause

But the West Side and its loyal Democratic operatives know the 45-year-old Mr.
Nadler. That clearly showed in his easy victory over a crowded field in the
Democratic County Committee's convention to nominate a successor to
Representative Ted Weiss, who died last week on the eve of his victory in the
Democratic primary for a ninth term.

"Jerry is a terrible nudnik," said the Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, using the
Yiddish term for an indefatigable pest or nag. "But in a good sense. When he has
something on his mind that he wants to get done, he'll never leave you alone.
I'm sure that from the unfortunate moment that Ted Weiss left us, he was
lobbying the county committee."

Or as his East Side colleague, Assemblyman Alexander B. Grannis, put it: "If
Jerry has a fault, it's that when he thinks something's important, there is no
backing off. He pays a great deal of attention to detail. He knows his subject
matter well. He may be a little long-winded; every one of his questions has 16
parts. But he's a very hard worker and I think he'll have a real chance to get
something done in Washington."

Such persistence has long been admired in a district that is among the most
liberal in the nation, and Mr. Nadler has touched all the right bases,
supporting women's rights and gay rights and fighting a steady -- some say,
almost obsessive -- battle to increase rail-freight capacity to reduce truck
traffic in Manhattan.

Yesterday, as he scurried to television appearances and to meetings with Gov.
Bill Clinton and Jewish leaders, and tried to return more than three dozen phone
calls of congratulations, Mr. Nadler said he looked forward to continuing the
district's liberal traditions in Washington. But he said it was hard to be
specific.

"I don't want to say I'm going to be the main pusher on this or that if it's
already being done," he said.

Mr. Nadler was raised in an Orthodox Jewish household and schooled in yeshivas
until he started Stuyvesant High School. He is the sort of lawmaker who can --
and did -- debate whether Jewish tradition condoned the death penalty, by
rattling off memorized passages from the Talmud in Hebrew in a duel with
Assemblyman Dov Hikind, a Brooklyn conservative, several years ago.

"It was much to the chagrin of the Assembly stenographer," said Assemblyman
Richard N. Gottfried of the West Side, a schoolmate who wrote literature for Mr.
Nadler's campaign for Stuyvesant student government president and lost out to
him for the Congressional nomination this week after James R. McManus, a
fourth-generation scion of Tammany Hall, switched his political club's votes to
Mr. Nadler at the last minute.

Among his Albany colleagues, Mr. Nadler is known as much for his breadth as for
his depth. To put it plainly, he is a big man, and some of his friends say they
worry about his health.

Born in Bensonhurst

"It's fine," Mr. Nadler said, adding, "Obviously, I should lose weight.
Unfortunately, there's still prejudice on that. It's like racial prejudice or
any prejudice. But unfortunately, people still feel they can make jokes on
that."

Born in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn on June 13, 1947, in a block that is now part of
his district, Mr. Nadler first became active in politics as a student at
Columbia in the 60's. He helped organized the effort to deny renomination to
President Johnson in 1967 and opposed the war in Vietnam. (His draft status was
4-F, because of an asthmatic condition that still requires him to use an inhaler
daily.)

He went to Fordham Law School at night and was elected to the Assembly in 1976.
He and his wife, Joyce L. Miller, who supervises low-income housing financing
projects for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, have
a son, Michael, 7. They live just down the street from Mr. Weiss's family, on
West End Avenue at 94th Street.

Mr. Weprin, the Assembly Speaker, had some words of warning for his counterpart
in Washington, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley: "There is no member of the
Assembly who came to me more often with individual plans and programs. I am
going to miss him to that extent. Sometimes I couldn't do what he wanted, but he
always made it interesting."


NAME: Jerrold Nadler

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Assemblyman Jerrold Nadler, with his mother, Miriam, and his
wife, Joyce L. Miller, after Mr. Nadler was named the Democratic nominee for
Congress as successor to Representative Ted Weiss, who died last week. (G. Paul
Burnett/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-U.S. Aide Says He Told Bush Of Iran Arms-for-Hostage Swap

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2511 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


A former national security aide in Ronald Reagan's White House said today that
he told George Bush in the spring of 1986 that the United States was trading
arms to Iran in exchange for the release of hostages.

This new information from Howard R. Teicher, who worked on the National Security
Council staff as a Middle East expert, contradicts Mr. Bush's repeated
assertions that he knew generally about the arms sales to Iran when they were
taking place but did not realize that they involved a direct swap of arms for
hostages.

Mr. Teicher said that Mr. Bush appeared interested in the topic and asked
pertinent questions but seemed reluctant to get involved in decision making on
hotly debated issues.

'Begin With What I Knew'

Mr. Bush has always said that he was "not in the loop," as he put it in 1987. He
provided his most detailed account of his knowledge of the affair in his book,
"Looking Forward" (Doubleday, 1987).

"Begin with what I knew and when I knew it," he wrote. "What I knew was that,
working through the Israelis, an effort had been made to 'reach out' to one of
the Iranian factions, that there had been a weapons sale, and that in some way
the hostage issue had become part of the project."

In the book, Mr. Bush explained that he did not know more because "the people
running the operation had it compartmentalized, like pieces of a puzzle." When
he finally realized the full dimensions of the affair, he was left with the
feeling that "I'd been deliberately excluded from key meetings involving details
of the Iran operation."

Other officials have said that Mr. Bush, then Vice President, was present at
meetings where the Iran initiative was discussed, but Mr. Teicher is the first
to describe, in detail, direct briefings. He said in a telephone interview that
Mr. Bush was fully engaged in the discussions, asked pointed questions, and
seemed to understand the implications of the arms trade.

The arms sales did not become public until almost six months after Mr. Teicher
says he briefed Mr. Bush on the matter.

Today, Mr. Bush adopted a defensive posture on the issue during an interview
with WBBM-AM in Chicago, saying that he had already "leveled with the American
people about the affair."

Mr. Teicher, who accompanied Robert C. McFarlane, the former National Security
Adviser, as a note-taker on an ill-fated hostage-release mission to Teheran in
May 1986, said he was forced to resign after the affair was made public. But he
said he bore no animosity toward Mr. Bush, and he denied suggestions by White
House aides that his comments might have been inspired by Democratic opponents.

Mr. Teicher said he is registered as an independent and has not decided for whom
he will vote in November. He said that no one had tried to persuade him to make
critical comments about Mr. Bush. He said he discussed the issue when he was
approached in recent days by a news organization that was re-examining the Bush
record in the Iran-contra affair.

"I briefed him in detail on aspects of the Iran initiative on several
occasions," said Mr. Teicher, who worked at the White House from 1982 to 1987
and now operates a computer software company here. "He was extremely well
informed about foreign affairs and extremely interested, yet I found a pattern
of behavior that was a desire to be very well informed but not to be involved on
any issue that was controversial."

Testified Twice

Mr. Teicher, who is writing a book about his White House years, has discussed
his role in the affair both in a sworn deposition for Congress, which was made
public at the conclusion of the Iran-contra hearings, and to a grand jury
investigating the affair. On Thursday he discussed his dealings with Mr. Bush in
an interview on the ABC News program "Nightline," and today he provided a fuller
account of his meetings with Mr. Bush. But he has never been as explicit in
public about what he told Mr. Bush as he was in the interview today.

Mr. Teicher's comments provide the latest provocative piece of information in an
accumulating body of evidence, compiled in Congressional investigations and in
criminal prosecutions, suggesting that Mr. Bush had a firmer grasp of the arms
sales to Iran than he has acknowledged publicly.

In his campaign autobiography, in speeches and in answers to reporters'
questions, Mr. Bush has tried over the years to explain his actions, asserting
that he had nothing to hide.

A New York Times/CBS News poll on Sept. 15 found that 55 percent of those
surveyed said that the President was hiding things the public needed to know
about the affair.

Of No Legal Consequence

There is no public evidence that Mr. Bush engaged in any wrongdoing during the
affair, nor is there any indication that he was aware of the most sensational
single aspect of the affair, the diversion of millions of dollars in proceeds
from the arms sales to the Nicaraguan rebels.

And Mr. Teicher's account appears to be of no legal consequence to Mr. Bush
since the independent prosecutor in the affair, Lawrence E. Walsh, has announced
he does not plan to seek further indictments.

But the President could pay a political price. After the Republicans pounded
Bill Clinton on his shifting responses to questions about his draft status
during the Vietnam War, Democrats seem ready to show that Mr. Bush may have
similar vulnerabilities over his candor on the Iran-contra affair.

"At the very least it raises questions about the completeness, accuracy and
credibility of the President's entire statements," said George J. Mitchell of
Maine, the Senate Democratic leader. Mr. Mitchell was a member of the panel that
investigated the affair, and he was the co-author of a book that included a
chapter casting doubt on Mr. Bush's contention that he was at the periphery of
decision-making.

As Vice President when the Iran-contra operations took place, Mr. Bush had no
operational authority, and as Mr. Reagan's understudy he was not expected to
disagree with the President on important policy issues, at least not openly. To
have done so, Mr. Bush said in his book, would have been "the worst kind of
cheap-shot opportunism."

Still, Mr. Bush stood apart from most of Mr. Reagan's top advisers as an
official who had dealt with some of the issues raised during the affair. As a
past Director of Central Intelligence, he had direct experience in covert
operations. And he was regarded as a student of diplomacy in the Middle East as
former ambassador to the United Nations.

A review of his past statements about the affair in light of the public record
raise questions about Mr. Bush's truthfulness about several significant elements
of the Iran-contra scheme. Mr. Bush says he felt excluded from key meetings and
had only a hazy grasp of the affair, but records show he attended important
meetings in which the affair was discussed.

Mr. Teicher said that in his discussions with Mr. Bush he told the Vice
President and other officials explicitly that arms were exchanged for hostages
in order to fulfill the broader strategic purpose of the project, to begin a
dialogue with moderates in Iran about improving relations.

"It was clear that without the U.S. providing something tangible to the
Iranians, the Iranians were not prepared to take the risk they thought might
exist," said Mr. Teicher. "This was not complex. We're not talking here about
quantum mechanics. What really stunned me was how all these principals suddenly
knew nothing about what was going on."

Memos and other documents from the period also suggest that Mr. Bush was often
present at Mr. Reagan's daily national security briefings, where the Iran-arms
deal was discussed.

Moreover, when Mr. Bush missed a session, John M. Poindexter, the national
security adviser, often provided Mr. Bush with the information he had missed,
Mr. Poindexter's lawyers testified in hearings in advance of his criminal trial
in which they unsuccessfully sought to subpoena Mr. Bush as a witness.

In addition, internal memos uncovered during the Iran-contra Congressional
hearings showed that Mr. Bush was present at a White House meeting on Jan. 6,
1986, when Mr. Poindexter advised the President of a plan to sell 4,000
anti-tank missiles to Iran. Mr. Bush also attended a meeting on Jan. 17, 1986,
when Mr. Reagan signed a legal order authorizing the transfer of arms to Iran in
exchange for hostages.

Had Comprehensive Overview

On July 29, 1986, in a meeting at the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, Amiram Nir,
an Israeli counterterrorism expert, provided Mr. Bush with a comprehensive
overview of the progress of the arms deals. A memo on the meeting by Mr. Bush's
aide, Craig Fuller, said that Mr. Nir "described the details of the effort from
last year through the current period to gain the release of the U.S. hostages."

In the weeks after Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed the affair in a
White House news conference, Mr. Bush stood by Mr. Reagan, saying that he
supported the Iran initiative. "When the flak gets heavy out there," Mr. Bush
said in an interview with Time magazine in December 1986, "the wingman doesn't
go peeling off and pull away from the flight leader."

In succeeding months, Mr. Bush subtly shifted his stance, appearing to walk a
tightrope between loyalty and independence, saying that his support for the
policy had not stopped him from voicing "reservations" about "certain aspects"
of the Iran initiative that he did not explain.

The public record provides no evidence of Mr. Bush's misgivings, although it is
possible that he expressed these views during his regular Thursday lunches with
Mr. Reagan, in conversations they have never discussed.

There is evidence that Mr. Bush endorsed the arms sales. On Feb. 1, 1986, Mr.
Poindexter wrote in an internal memo that George P. Shultz, the Secretary of
State, and Caspar W. Weinberger, the Defense Secretary, disagreed with the arms
deals. But he said that William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence,
Donald Regan, the chief of staff, Mr. Meese and Mr. Poindexter himself were
"fully on board this risky operation."

"But most importantly," said Mr. Poindexter's memo. "President and VP are solid
in taking the position that we have to try."

Last month Iran-contra prosecutors, working in connection with Mr. Weinberger's
coming trial on perjury charges, disclosed that they had found a hint that Mr.
Bush might have embraced the arms sales more enthusiastically than he has
acknowledged.

Papers filed by the prosecutors mention notes of a conversation in August 1987
between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger. The notes, taken by an aide to Mr.
Shultz, depict Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Shultz reacting indignantly to Mr. Bush's
remarks playing down his role in the arms sales in an interview with The
Washington Post

Mr. Bush said in the interview that he had not opposed the arms deals because he
did not realize that Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger had raised serious
objections.

The notes show that Mr. Weinberger said that Mr. Bush's remarks were "terrible"
and that the Vice President "was on the other side" in the internal battle over
the arms sales.

The aides notes also tipped off prosecutors to the existence of Mr. Weinberger's
private diaries, the prime piece of evidence against him. In 1987, Mr. Shultz
told the Presidential review board investigating the affair that after the White
House meeting he knew that Mr. Reagan, Mr. Bush and other senior advisers "all
had one opinion, and I had a different one and Cap shared it."



IN HIS OWN WORDS: BUSH'S ROLE IN ARMS SHIPMENTS

Dec. 3, 1986 -- "I was aware of our Iran initiative and I supported the
President's decision. I was not aware of and oppose any diversion of funds, any
ransom payments or any circumvention of the will of Congress." -- Speech to the
American Enterprise Institute

Feb.11, 1987 -- "The key players around there know that I expressed certain
reservations on certain aspects, but I also see some things in the media that I
know not to be true about my role." -- News conference in Lansing, Mich.

Aug. 6, 1987 -- "I'f I'd have sat there and heard George Shultz and Cap express
it strongly maybe I would have had a stronger view. But when yoiu don't know
spomething it's hard to react ... we were not in the loop." -- In The Washington
Post

Jan. 7, 1988 -- "It wasn't planning and discussing and going over all these
details like a National Security Council meeting. ... That never took place.
That's one of the mistakes." -- When asked about the briefings he received on
the arms shipments.

Jan. 14, 1988 -- "I was not at meetings in 1985, especially the Dec. 7, 1985,
meeting when objections were apparently forcefully stated. ... Had there been
any strenuous objection (at other meetings) I am sure I would have remembered
it." -- In The Washington Post.

May 1987 -- "I was asked by reporters why I didn't know more. The answer was and
is that the people running the operation had it compartmentalized, like pieces
of a puzzle. My first real chance to see the picture as a whole didn't come
until December 1986 when Dave Durenberger, then chairman of the Senate
Intelligence committee, briefed me on his committee's investigation of the
affair. ... What Dave had to say left with the feeling, expressed to my chief of
staff, Craig Fuller, that I'd been deliberately excluded from key meetings
involving details of Iran-contra operation." -- in his autobiography

May 1987 -- "As it turned out, George Shultz and Cap Weinberger had serious
doubts, too. If I had known that and asked the President to call a meeting of
the N.S.C., he might have seen the project in a different light, as a gamble
doomed to fail." In his autobiography

Dec. 5, 1987 -- "I never really heard them that clearly. And the reason is that
the machinery broke down. It never worked as it should. They key players with
the experience weren't ever called together the review the decision that were
made at a lower level." -- in an interview with David Frost, about why he didn't
heed objections by Caspar Weinberger and George Shultz to the arms shipments.

Jan. 30, 1988 -- "The initiative first came to my attention in 1985, but I have
no precise recollection of when I had my first conversation on the subject. ...
I have never indicated that I opposed the effort to open a channel to factions
in Iran. In fact, I have said a number of times that I supported the
initiative." -- in The New York Times.

June 9, 1988 -- "I didn't say I didn't know anything that was going on. I said
it never became clear to me, the whole arms-for-hostages thing, until it was
fully debriefed, investigated and debriefed by Durenberger." -- On the ABC
program "Nightline"

Sept. 25, 1992 -- "I believe I've levelled with the American people, and I have
nothing to add to it. ... Clearly, if I'd done anything wrong ... you can bet
that the Democrats in Congress would have had me before the bar." -- In an
interview with Chicago radio station WBBM

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Howard R. Teicher, a former national security aide. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times)(pg. 1); Howard R. Teicher, who worked on the National
Security Council staff, said he met with George Bush in 1986 to tell him that
the United States was trading arms to Iran in exchange for the release of
hostages. At the meeting on May 29, 1986, above, Mr. Teicher and Robert C.
McFarlane, second from right, spoke with President Reagan, Mr. Bush, and Donald
Regan, left, then Chief of Staff. (White House Photo)(pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Guerrillas Told to Stick to Peace Plan

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 25


Foreign Ministers of the Security Council's five permanent member nations warned
the Khmer Rouge today that they would push ahead with their peace plan for
Cambodia without the guerrilla faction's participation if it continued to renege
on its commitment to comply with the terms of the accord.

The declaration was issued by the ministers after a meeting with Secretary
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who delivered a similar warning to the Khmer
Rouge on Thursday. Mr. Boutros-Ghali said he would seek to exclude the faction
from the free elections that the United Nations planned to hold in Cambodia in
May unless it instructed its troops to disarm and admit United Nations officials
to areas it controls.

Excluding the Khmer Rouge and their supporters from the elections would be
risky, for it would leave a new Government in Phnom Penh confronting a heavily
armed force that did not recognize its legitimacy. That would raise the specter
of renewed civil war and put pressure on the United Nations to keep 15,000
peacekeeping troops in Cambodia longer than planned.

Alternative Called Worse

But diplomats said the alternative is even worse. Withdrawing peacekeeping
troops or delaying the elections would be a severe loss of face for the United
Nations, which has virtually taken over the governing of Cambodia and is deeply
committed to insuring a transition to democratic rule.

"Are we going to let the Khmer Rouge kick the United Nations out of Cambodia?"
one diplomat said.

The 15-member Security Council is to meet next week to review the Cambodian
situation and decide whether to proceed with preparations for the elections
without the Khmer Rouge.

It will also consider whether to close Thailand's border with Cambodia to cut
off the Khmer Rouge's export trade in tropical lumber and precious stones, the
group's main source of income.

In their statement, the Foreign Ministers of the United States, Britain, France,
Russia and China expressed "deep concern" over the Khmer Rouge's recent decision
to stop complying with the peace agreements they accepted along with all the
other warring Cambodian factions last October.

Diplomats said that the permanent Security Council members favored pressing on
if necessary with elections excluding people in the area the Khmer Rouge now
control, roughly 15 percent of the country.

From hundreds of thousands to more than a million Cambodians are believed to
have died from starvation or disease or through summary execution between 1975
and 1978, when the Khmer Rouge and its feared leader, Pol Pot, presided over a
brutal restructuring of Cambodia. The Vietnamese Army invaded in late 1978 and
drove the Khmer Rouge from power.

In a report to the Security Council released on Thursday, Secretary General
Boutros-Ghali accused the Khmer Rouge of "seriously impairing" the United
Nations' ability to carry out its peace plan within the time frame agreed by the
Security Council.

But he described himself as "determined" to adhere to the original timetable and
hold Cambodia's first free elections in May, without the Khmer Rouge if
necessary.

"The time is approaching when some difficult decisions regarding ways and means
of pursuing this operation will have to be seriously considered," Mr.
Boutros-Ghali said.

Under the Security Council peace plan, the United Nations has sent more than
20,000 soldiers, police and civilians to Cambodia, virtually taking over the
administration of the country as it prepares for democratic elections. The
peacekeeping force is charged with disarming the soldiers of the four main
factions and maintaining security.

A Demobilization Plan

Under the peace plan, the United Nations force is supposed to confine the
soldiers of all the factions, including the Khmer Rouge, to cantonments and
demobilize at least 70 percent of them by the end of this month, when
registration of voters and political parties should begin.

The Khmer Rouge have refused to cooperate with this part of the plan, and are
barring United Nations officials from entering areas controlled by the Khmer
Rouge. As a result, less than a quarter of the forces of the other three
factions have entered United Nations cantonments or surrendered their arms.
Those factions are led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Son Sann, Prince Sihanouk's
former Prime Minister, and Hun Sen, the former head of the Phnom Penh government
installed by Vietnam.

Diplomats said that leaders of the Khmer Rouge, hiding in a jungle headquarters,
apparently decided in May not to cooperate with the United Nations plan. The
Khmer Rouge leaders may have been hoping that public dissatisfaction with
politicians in Phnom Penh would eventually turn public opinion in their favor.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Panel of Scientists Finds Dioxin Does Not Pose Widespread Cancer Threat

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


An independent panel of scientists concluded today that dioxin was not a
large-scale cancer threat except to people exposed to unusually high levels of
the toxic compound in chemical factories and from accidents.

But the federally appointed panel said its study of the latest international
research on the health and environmental effects of dioxin vividly showed that
exceedingly minute levels of dioxin caused biological havoc among fish, birds
and other wild animals.

Some panelists and other experts said the compound's ecological effects might
turn out to be the most important factor when the Government considered whether
to tighten or relax the limits for dioxin allowed in air, water and soil. That
action is expected next year.

The 14-member panel, which met for the first time over four days this week, was
convened by the Environmental Protection Agency as part of a project to
completely review what the Government knows about the health and environmental
effects of dioxin.

The panel based its conclusion about the effects of dioxin on human health
largely on four studies, particularly one completed last year by Dr. Marilyn
Fingerhut of the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health in
Cincinnati.

Cautioning that their findings were preliminary, the panelists said exposure to
high concentrations of dioxin, or TCDD, seemed to increase the risk of
developing two types of lethal cancers, lung cancer and particularly soft tissue
sarcoma, a cancer of connective tissue.

The risks, several panelists said, are largely confined to chemical workers and
people exposed to high levels of dioxin from industrial accidents. They said the
levels of dioxin ordinarily found in the environment had not been shown to be
dangerous to people.

The findings are the clearest statements ever made by a Government-sponsored
panel about the potential risks from dioxin, a byproduct of industrial processes
in which compounds containing chlorine are burned. But panelists said a final
statement about the risks of dioxin was not likely to be finished for several
more months.

A 20-Year-Old Debate

The findings will not settle the debate that began 20 years ago over whether
dioxin is the "most toxic compound known to man," as environmentalists say, or
that the United States has overstated the risk from dioxin, a position taken by
some scientists and many industrial executives.

Even before the panel reached its conclusion, the Environmental Defense Fund, a
national environmental group based in New York, issued a statement on Wednesday
that said the panel's deliberations this week confirmed that dioxin was "far
more toxic than previously believed."

Stewart E. Holm, the manager of science policy for the Georgia-Pacific
Corporation, which produces dioxin as a byproduct of bleaching paper, responded
that the panel appeared to find that dioxin was "not as dangerous as commonly
thought."

The scientific panel's work is part of an official reassessment of the potential
hazards of dioxin that William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, began in May 1991.

Risk to Chemical Workers

Mr. Reilly opened the investigation after members of his staff, a prominent
scientist with the Federal Centers for Disease Control and scientists with the
paper and chlorine processing industries suggested that new scientific evidence
indicated that the Government was exaggerating the risks to ordinary people from
day-to-day exposure to dioxin.

The panel's findings today, according to several members, suggest that the risk
to chemical workers handling compounds containing dioxin are higher than once
thought. At the same time, panel members said, the risk to average Americans
exposed to dioxin, principally by eating beef, dairy products, chicken and fish,
is lower than previously believed.

Asked whether ordinary Americans should be concerned about concentrations of
dioxin that are now ubiquitous in the environment, Dr. Edward Bresnick, a panel
member who is toxicologist at the Dartmouth Medical School in Hanover, N.H.,
said, "Probably not."

Dr. Bresnick also said that the Government "did overrespond" in 1982 when it
ordered almost 3,000 residents to be evacuated from Times Beach, Mo., after
discovering dioxin in soil around the river town just west of St. Louis.

Last year the man who ordered the evacuation, Dr. Vernon N. Houk, director of
the Center for Environmental Health and Injury Control at the Centers for
Disease Control, caused a public furor in the St. Louis region when he said the
Government had erred in ordering the evacuation.

Dr. Bresnick, like other panel members, added today that dioxin was still
capable of causing considerable damage and that the threat to wildlife should
not be ignored. He said the compound could lead to widespread deaths among fish
fry and bird chicks as well as birth defects in many species.

Scientists have long known that laboratory animals are apparently much more
sensitive to the dioxin molecule than people for reasons that are not well
understood, and newer studies have found that trout, salmon, and some species of
birds also are very sensitive.

The Wrong Focus

"The effects on reproduction and behavior in animals are greater than we
expected," Dr. Bresnick said. "The problem is that we focused most of our
attention on carcinogenicity in people."

Since the early 1970's, when dioxin was discovered as a contaminant in Agent
Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War and that veterans contended was a
cause of cancer and birth defects, few pollutants produced by human activity
have received as much attention from the public or the Government. Because of
dioxin's striking effects on laboratory animals, the United States set the
world's strictest limits for the compound in drinking water and the lowest
recommended limit for an average person's daily consumption.

The Government also established stringent requirements for cleaning up hazardous
waste sites and incinerating garbage and chemicals to prevent dioxin from
spreading in the environment.

Industrial corporations have argued with increasing persistence that the
standards, particularly for water in which dioxin levels are required to be as
low as 13 parts per quintillion, are not supported by scientific data and are
expensive to meet.

But environmental scientists, especially a group at the Environmental Defense
Fund, argue that the panel's finding on cancer in people and the high rate of
reproductive effects in animals, suggested that the Government's existing
standards should be even stricter and new ones issued.

For instance, even though the highest risk from dioxin in people clearly comes
from exposures to it in factories, the Labor Department has never issued a
workplace safety limit for the compound.

The panel also said today that almost all the dioxin in the tissues of ordinary
Americans came from eating beef, chicken, dairy products and fish. Dioxin,
produced by incinerators, chemical factories, coal burning power plants and
other industries, accumulates in animal fat.

The Food and Drug Administration has issued only one health advisory for dioxin
in fish. If fish contains more than 50 parts per trillion of dioxin, the
equivalent of slicing a fingernail trillions of times, it should not be eaten.

In separate interviews, several panelists said today that they did not consider
the levels of dioxin in most Americans, about 5 parts per trillion in fat, to be
an important health hazard. They noted that average concentrations of dioxin in
people were falling, perhaps because people were eating less animal products and
more grains, fruits and vegetables.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

What About the P.O.W. Families?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 448 words


America's Vietnam agony ended a generation ago but one issue won't go away --
the fate of several hundred servicemen who disappeared after being captured in
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Few are likely to be alive. But their families are
entitled to know anything the U.S. Government has learned about them, and
anything it can still find out.

For the past year, the Senate P.O.W.-M.I.A. Committee has worked diligently to
provide such an accounting. But this week President Nixon's national security
adviser, Henry Kissinger, took the stand and the hearings quickly degenerated
into refighting old policy battles.

The families so long deceived deserve better from their country than again to be
left to watch as self-justifying politicians and strategists plunge back into
the quagmire.

The Paris peace accords of January 1973 obligated North Vietnam to return all
American prisoners of war. When Hanoi handed back 591 prisoners,the Nixon
Administration proclaimed success. But Washington's own secret figures showed
that hundreds more had fallen into enemy hands alive and remained unaccounted
for.

It now turns out that the Administration based its claim of success on semantic
distinctions. Since Washington had no proof that the others remained alive in
1973, it listed them not as P.O.W.'s but as M.I.A.'s, missing in action. That
shamefully misled the families and forfeited a chance to press Hanoi for the
prisoners' return.

For the next two decades, successive Administrations discounted or even
ridiculed reports of surviving prisoners. Belatedly, the present Senate
committee's bipartisan effort is rectifying a painful wrong.

To its credit, the Bush Administration has turned over masses of once-classified
material. Three Nixon-era Defense Secretaries, Melvin Laird, James Schlesinger
and Elliot Richardson, have acknowledged that the Pentagon could have been more
candid.

But Mr. Kissinger offered only sophistry, self-justification and counterattacks.
Classifying those reported captured as missing rather than as prisoners, he
contended, helped spare the families suffering. He bridled at the very idea of
questions from the committee co-chairman John Kerry, a Vietnam veteran turned
war critic. He blamed anti-war senators of the 70's for undercutting his
bargaining hand with Hanoi, and thus for any prisoners left behind.

The families of those still unaccounted for have already lost far too much time
to these obsolete arguments between hawks and doves. Their needs, not political
reputations, ought to be the primary concern. Senator Kerry's responsibility is
to help them gain the fullest possible understanding of the fate of their loved
ones.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Ratso Rizzo Redux? Not if He Can Help It

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1471 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


Dustin Hoffman is, characteristically, beset by angst.

"People say to me, 'Why don't you work more? Nicholson works more. De Niro works
more,' " he says earnestly. "I say, 'Right, I should.' I'm getting older. Three
years between 'Kramer' and 'Tootsie.' 'Rain Man' was almost two years of work.
And, yeah, I'm getting older, and I'd better change. I know that Nicholson is
philosophical. He raises that eyebrow. So cool. He says, in that Nicholson way,
'Some films work. Some films don't work.' He's got those gentile genes. Can't I
be like that? Why do I die inside with each movie?"

At 55, after nearly two dozen films, the two-time Academy Award winner should be
more secure. His very first film, "The Graduate" in 1967, made him a star. Last
year, Steven Spielberg's "Hook" made him rich. On finishing that film, Mr.
Hoffman plunged into a risky comedy-drama called "Hero," to open on Friday with
favorable advance word of mouth.

A contemporary story in the vein of Preston Sturges and Frank Capra, "Hero"
explores heroism, journalism and the nation's craving for idols. The director is
Stephen Frears, whose credits include "The Grifters," "Dangerous Liaisons" and
"My Beautiful Laundrette." And it co-stars Geena Davis as an ambitious
television journalist and Andy Garcia as an otherwise decent fellow who achieves
influence, glory and fortune by passing himself off as a hero.

Mr. Hoffman plays Bernie LaPlante, a petty crook who, in spite of himself, risks
his life to save 54 passengers from a burning plane but shuns the accolades the
impostor accepts. ("I don't take credit," LaPlante says. "I'm a cash kind of
guy.")

"Usually you get a script," Mr. Hoffman says, "and if you like it in the
beginning, you put it down after 30 pages; and then you walk around because you
fear it'll fall apart, and then you do the same thing after the next 20 pages.
This story just held together."

But Mr. Hoffman's enthusiasm did not survive the start of production last year.
He has a reputation for being difficult on the set, and his anguish as he
grappled with finding the key to Bernie LaPlante nearly scuttled the film.

Mr. Hoffman and just about everyone connected with the movie depict the first
three weeks as hell because the star was so unhappy with his characterization,
which reminded him of Ratso Rizzo, his sleazy drifter in the 1969 film "Midnight
Cowboy."

"It frightened me," Mr. Hoffman said. "I didn't know how to approach the role.
It was all so derivative. I looked at the early rushes, and I thought this was
not for me. I seemed so angry and bitter and sullen. I played such a loser. It
wasn't fun to watch. I told Stephen I was quitting."

At 7 one morning after several weeks of filming, Mr. Hoffman called the film's
producer, Laura Ziskin, and told her of his crisis.  She urged him to spend
several hours alone talking to David Webb Peoples, the screenwriter, and Mr.
Frears. He accepted her advice.

"Then one night, I hit on an idea and began playing with it," the actor said.
"This guy doesn't believe anything anybody ever says. Especially in these times.
He doesn't believe anything. There's not a sincere moment that he goes through.
It's a fun kind of paranoia.

"I asked Stephen if I could improvise, and he said sure, but he also said,
'Look, I'm English, I come from the BBC, and I shoot from the script, and you'll
stick to the text." Mr. Hoffman says with a laugh, "Frears also told me I was
getting paid enough, so just do it. He's from that school."

Says Mr. Frears: "He was trying to solve a problem that only he felt existed.
Dustin is a bit like Frank Sinatra. He takes the business of entertaining very
seriously. When he got it right -- when he felt he got it right -- the sun began
to shine."

The two younger stars in the movie, Mr. Garcia and Ms. Davis, had heard the
stories about Mr. Hoffman's past behavior and were understandably a little
nervous.

"You hear through the grapevine that he likes to improvise, and he does," Mr.
Garcia says. "He's very inventive. He's always exploring, always available to
the other actors and playful."

Now, wearing jeans and a cotton shirt as he sits in a nondescript Japanese
restaurant in a mini-mall not far from his Brentwood home, the movie star can
joke about his reputation for difficulty. "Ah," he says, "the 'D' word."

Mr. Hoffman's reputation for being difficult began with the 1978 melodrama
"Straight Time," about a convict on parole. He was initially set to direct the
film, in which he also starred, but he lost out to Ulu Grosbard, and the
studio's refusal to allow him to edit the movie wound up in litigation, which
Mr. Hoffman says he eventually won.

On the 1982 hit "Tootsie," for which he was also co-producer, he fought
constantly with its director and co-producer, Sydney Pollack, about the themes
of the film, which dealt with a frustrated New York actor who posed as a woman
to find work.

"Sydney wanted to do a meaningful picture about feminism, a romantic story,"
says Mr. Hoffman, "and I wanted to focus -- aside from the comedy aspect -- on a
portrait of an actor, or why an actor is nuts, why are we different from other
artists. The answer is because, unlike a painter or writer, an actor has to be
employed to work, and if you can't practice your craft, you go crazy." Relations
between Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Pollack are now friendly.

On the 1991 flop "Billy Bathgate," a film whose production still rankles Mr.
Hoffman, he fought with Robert Benton, the director, and Disney Studios over the
script, casting and editing. "What was it?" Mr. Hoffman asks heatedly. "Was it a
love story, a gangster story, a coming-of-age story?" His relations with Jeffrey
Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, which produced "Billy
Bathgate," are about as friendly as those of President Bush and Bill Clinton.

Politics and life and death in Washington lie at the roots of "Hero." It
sprouted from two real life events: the 1984 Presidential campaign, and the 1982
Air Florida plane crash in the Potomac in which a man saved passengers before
drowning.

The film was initially conceived by Ms. Ziskin, the producer, and the
screenwriter Alvin Sargent. "In the 1984 primary," Ms. Ziskin says, "we became
intrigued with the role of television in the Gary Hart campaign, and the fact
that the broadcast media define us and reduce us to one act and one act alone."

Ms. Ziskin, who lives with Mr. Sargent, adds: "There was this man who drowned in
the Potomac, performed this incredible act of heroism and drowned, and we
thought, 'What would happen if a hero turned out to be a crumb?' " The two took
the skein of ideas to Mr. Peoples, and his script attracted Mr. Hoffman.

Awaiting the film's release, he admits to moments of self-doubt, even panic
about the future, even though he can be comfortable with risk. For example, Mr.
Hoffman appeared in a Broadway revival of Arthur Miller's "Death of a Salesman"
in 1984 and took a year to play Shylock in "The Merchant of Venice" in London
and on Broadway in 1989.

Away from the stage and the cameras, the star, who has a large apartment on
Central Park West in New York, has spent the last few years in Los Angeles with
his second wife, Lisa. The couple have four children, and Mr. Hoffman also has
two children from his first marriage.

Looking ahead, he has no immediate project but indicates that he is exploring
the possibility of a film about the Vietnam War. Looking back, he has a number
of regrets.

"Bergman wanted me for two films," he says. "Fellini once wanted me for a film,
and I didn't do it; and those are big mistakes. Those guys don't knock on your
door often. Spielberg wanted me for 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind.' I read
the script. It was great, but I thought I was going to wind up playing another
version of Benjamin in 'The Graduate.' I didn't realize then how hard it was to
get a good script with a good director."

Now he reads several scripts a week. "I've always wanted to play a doctor, a
lawyer," he says. "I'd love to play a guy who wears Armani suits. I'd love to
look handsome before it's too late -- you know, Michael Douglas in 'Wall
Street.' All those nice clothes."

Ever since "The Graduate," the actor has thought constantly about what might
have happened had Mike Nichols not cast him. He suspects he would have wound up
in regional theaters: "I hardly looked like Tab Hunter or Troy Donahue."

Mr. Hoffman recalles a dinner with an ailing Sir Laurence Olivier, shortly
before his death, during which he asked Olivier why he became an actor.

"He said, 'You really want to know?' and I said, 'Yes,' and Olivier put his face
up against mine and said, 'Look at me, look at me, look at me, look at me.' "

Mr. Hoffman laughs. "Cut away all the nonsense -- that's why we want to be
actors."

NAME: Dustin Hoffman

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dustin Hoffman in a scene from "Hero," which opens on Friday --
"It frightened me," the actor said. "I didn't know how to approach the role. It
was all so derivative." (Murray Close/Columbia Pictures)(pg. 13); In 1967 the
actor, above, won acclaim for portraying a sleazy drifter in "Midnight Cowboy."
As Bernie LaPlante in "Hero," below, he aimed to create a different sort of
character. (United Artists)(pg. 17)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 19; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words



FOR BANNED BOOK WEEK

"Mark Twain, Salman Rushdie and Your Freedom to Read" is the title of a talk
being presented on Thursday at the Yonkers Library to observe Banned Book Week,
which ends on Saturday. The speakers are Richard and Bernard Stein, brothers and
co-publishers of the Riverdale Press, a weekly newspaper founded by their
parents in 1950.

The subject is one familiar to them, ever since they had to rebuild their
offices after a firebombing in 1989, ostensibly in response to an editorial
defending Rushdie's "Satanic Verses."

After the attack, the paper received a First Amendment Award from the Society of
Professional Journalists, and over the years it has received many state and
national awards.

Bernard Stein formerly worked as an editor at the Mark Twain archives of the
University of California at Berkeley, contributing to 19 volumes of a projected
100-volume edition of Twain's works and serving as chief editor of 3 volumes.
Richard Stein is a past president of the New York Press Association, which
represents weekly and community newspapers; he has won several awards for
graphic design and typography.

Their lecture begins at 7:30 in the Grinton I. Will Branch, at 1500 Central Park
Avenue.

BONSAI EXHIBITION

The Yama Ki Bonsai Society of Harrison and the New York Botanical Garden in the
Bronx are co-organizers of this year's Bonsai Exhibition at the Botanical Garden
from Thursday through Sunday.

Bonsai, which in Japanese means "to cultivate in a tray," requires patience and
care in shaping, pruning and coaxing slow-growing miniature shrubs and trees
into elegant shapes. Tips on cultivation and commentary on the dozens of bonsai
specimens in the show will be available from Yuji Yoshimura, a bonsai master,
and from members of the Harrison society during the four days.

The exhibition will be in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory. It is open Thursday
and Friday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $3; $2 for children 6 to 16 and people 62 and older. Visitors will
be admitted up to an hour before closing. The number to call for more
information and directions is (212) 220-8777.

STRESSING PLURALITY

Seven artists from different racial and ethnic backgrounds have been selected
for the Hudson River Museum's new exhibition called "In Plural America:
Contemporary Journeys, Voices and Identities." The show, which opens in Yonkers
on Friday, will remain through Jan. 24 in the Lower Main Gallery and Gallery 2.

Hung Liu, a Chinese American, has produced a triptych in charcoal and oil on
canvas that shows the transition of a Chinese family through three generations.
The gradual transformation from a more rigid Asian culture into the individual
freedom of Americans is depicted with precision characteristic of Chinese art.
It is reflected in the clothes, the grouping of family members, their facial
expressions, their body language and the introduction of new, non-Asian faces as
the family becomes integrated.

The other seven artists offer equally affecting explorations of their personal
evolution as Americans. Identified by their family's place of origin, they are
Mo Bahc of South Korea, Melvin Edwards of Africa, Nereyda Garcia-Ferraz of Cuba,
Liliana Porter of Argentina, Jaune Quick-to-See Smith, an American Indian, and
Nitza Tufino of Puerto Rico.

The museum, at 511 Warburton Avenue, is open Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays
from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Fridays from 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Sundays from noon to 5
P.M.. Admission is $3; $1.50 for children 12 and younger and people 62 and
older. More information can be obtained by calling 963-4550.

POETRY READING SERIES

A free poetry reading series begins today at 3 P.M. in the Hudson River Museum,
with Daniela Gioseffi, winner of the 1990 American Book Award for "Women on War:
Global Voices for Survival" (Simon & Schuster). Ms. Gioseffi's first collection
of poems, titled "Eggs in the Lake," part of the New Poets of America Series
(BOA Editions), received a New York Council on the Arts Award. She has taught
and lectured in colleges and universities around the country.

The second and third programs in the series will feature Wendy Wilder Larsen and
Tran Thi Nga, co-authors of "Shallow Graves: Two Women and Vietnam," on Nov. 14,
and Edward Field, a World War II bomber pilot and winner of many awards,
including a Guggenheim Fellowship, the Prix de Rome from the American Academy of
Arts and Letters, the Lamont Award from the Academy of American Poets and the
Shelley Memorial Award from the Poetry Society of America. He will appear on
Dec. 6. Museum admission is $3, offering access to exhibits as well as the
readings.

IN HONOR OF COLUMBUS

A Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Ball will be held Saturday from 7 to 11
P.M. at the Westchester Marriott in Tarrytown, with proceeds benefiting the
Foundation for Westchester Community College scholarships and tutorial support.

The hotel pool area, balcony and ballroom will be decorated to represent,
respectively, an Italian courtyard with mimes dressed and performing as living
Roman statues, a 15th-century Spanish castle with strolling musicians and an
all-American red, white and blue setting for dancing to the music of the Howard
Leshaw Swing Band.

Food indigenous to Italy, Spain and America will be served after guests are
greeted by a costumed Christopher Columbus. Raffle prizes include a Columbus
Quincentenary scarf from Hermes, a sculptured reproduction of the Santa Maria
and tickets to the premiere of "Christopher Columbus," the new film with Gerard
Depardieu in the title role and Faye Dunaway as Queen Isabella.

Dress will be formal, and admission is $75. The number to call for reservations
or more information is 285-2934.

'BEAUTY AND THE BEAST'

An original 90-minute musical version of "Beauty and the Beast" will be
presented by the Yorktown Theater Company at Yorktown Performing Arts Theater on
Saturday at 1 and 3 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M. The book, music and lyrics
were written by Paul Louis, and the production will be staged with period
costumes and sets.

Mr. Louis's script was selected from several others solicited by the company's
director, Kevin J. Kearins. "The idea for a new 'Beauty and the Beast'
germinated last year," said Angela DeCicco, the group's publicist, "and Mr.
Kearins was most impressed with the Paul Louis version."

Mr. Louis is an actor as well as a composer and writer. He has appeared in many
regional theaters in Pennsylvania and his native Florida and Off Broadway at
Theater Three in Manhattan.

The theater is on Veteran's Road in Yorktown Heights. Tickets at $8 can be
reserved by calling 962-6665.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


To the Editor:

I have watched the increasingly strident debate over the draft avoidance of Bill
Clinton and Dan Quayle with a great deal of sadness.

I joined the Army in 1969, the year Mr. Clinton signed a letter of intent to
join the Reserve Officers' Training Corps, which he apparently never intended to
live up to; and Mr. Quayle joined a National Guard unit, which apparently had
slots reserved for the privileged. Though Mr. Clinton's deceit, if true, would
be morally more culpable than Mr. Quayle's actions, there would seem to be
little difference in either man's conduct.

Both had the chance to serve their country in a war we should never have
entered, and to take part in losing that war; both said, No thanks, I'd rather
keep my hide and do what I want to do -- fairly intelligent decisions as things
turned out.

I served in Vietnam in 1971 as an infantry platoon leader and company executive
officer. Unlike the experience of William Broyles Jr. ("Clinton Wouldn't Enlist.
He Was Right," Op-Ed, Sept. 22), the men in my company were not high school
dropouts but a cross-section of middle America, including college graduates in
both the officer and enlisted ranks.

No one I served with wanted to be in Vietnam, or thought we should be there. But
most felt a duty to be there, because our country had decided, however wrongly,
that national security demanded our service. Six of those with whom I served,
including three college graduates who once faced decisions similar to those made
by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Quayle and decided differently, now have their names
engraved on the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington.

Were we, and the millions of others who served in Vietnam, a bunch of saps --
which seems to be the message implicit in this debate? I don't think so. I think
we did what we were supposed to do. Our Government makes decisions about wars,
and we hope it makes them wisely. Sometimes, as in Vietnam, it makes a mistake.
But dodging the draft and letting someone else go won't, as we know, correct
that mistake. It just means someone else has to pay for it.

Vietnam was indeed a national tragedy, and it may seem unfair to criticize
anyone who avoided it by whatever means. However, I know six good reasons why
criticism is appropriate: they are -- and I don't mean simply metaphorically --
etched in stone.

J. E. GERVIN JR.
Lookout Mountain, Tenn.
Sept. 23, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Cooking Up Some Ideas For Negative Campaigns

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"EVER notice Bill Clinton when he runs?" asked Sean Fitzpatrick, an advertising
executive who recently parted with the Bush campaign's ad team. "He looks like a
duck."

Mr. Fitzpatrick turned that concept into a proposal for a television commercial:
a waddling mechanical duck dissolves into images of the hefty Arkansas Governor
jogging. The announcer says Mr. Clinton claims he is "not like those Democrats
in Congress who like to tax and spend, tax and spend." Then, after the duck has
quacked, he says: "We say, if it talks like a duck, walks like a duck, it must
be a Democrat."

Though that spot has not been made, the season of the attack ad has arrived.
Last week, the Clinton and Bush campaigns officially began using paid-for
airtime to fling mud.

The Clinton camp fired first; its commercial interspersed clips of President
Bush making predictions of a recovery with black-and-white frames showing rising
jobless figures.

The Bush campaign tried humor; it used hick music and fast-forward video in an
ad that portrays Mr. Clinton as a Governor of a small, backward state who did
little but raise taxes.

It will only get nastier, and the toughest ads can be expected to come from the
Republicans as long as Mr. Bush is stuck in second place in the polls.

"The resistance to Bush is akin to the resistance that mosquitoes have developed
to DDT -- people are resisting any and all advances from him," said Douglas
Watts, the advertising director for the 1984 Reagan campaign who is now in
public relations. "The only way to truly overcome that is to start beating up
the other guy."

Killer commercials have inherent risks, but they are often the only way
candidates can break through to voters whose only exposure to political
discourse is on "Murphy Brown," not the evening news.

The most important decision facing the Republicans in coming weeks is not
whether to attack but how hard and on what issues: If Mr. Bush jumps from family
values to the draft to pollution in Arkansas, he risks confusing voters and
undermining his own credibility.

Most analysts agree that reviving tales of womanizing would only cast the
Republicans as purveyors of sleaze. And while the Bush campaign has prepared
advertising implying that Mr. Clinton evaded the draft, many Republican
strategists questioned whether that issue "has legs" because of the public's
ambiguity about the Vietnam War.

Pick One Bull's Eye

"They have to throw darts at one bull's eye," said Don Sipple, an advertising
consultant in Mr. Bush's campaign earlier this year. "It has to be Clinton's
credibility. I would deal with it very explicitly. Just frame it there at the
top of the commercial: How much can we really trust Bill Clinton?"

As long as the criticisms are accurate, Mr. Sipple has no qualms about nasty
ads. "You're going to take the hit for going negative," he said, "so you might
as well land the blow."

But officials in both the Bush and Clinton camps are nervous because it is
getting harder to dodge media "truth squads" -- greater efforts by reporters to
look into the claims made in the advertisements. They also know some voters have
grown sophisticated about commercials and may not want to elect someone they
think is too vicious.

Mr. Bush is still accused of race-baiting with the Willie Horton ad in 1988. A
reminder of the danger to the messenger is Elizabeth Holtzman's attacks on
Geraldine A. Ferraro in New York's Democratic Senate primary. The ads may have
cost Ms. Ferraro the race, but Ms. Holtzman came in fourth, and many voters
disliked the tone of her campaign.

The Bush campaign's use of humor and the Clinton campaign's attempts to hang the
President using only his own words and numbers from his own Bureau of Labor
Statistics may have been attempts to avoid sharing Ms. Holtzman's predicament.

Republicans say their television assault will move into higher gear this week,
and the Clinton campaign is not known for shrinking from a brawl. Neither camp
will disclose what it has in the works, but several political consultants were
asked what they would do under the circumstances. Mr. Fitzpatrick's answer was
the duck ad.

Tony Schwartz, a Democratic consultant, said he would reprise his 1968 "A
Heartbeat Away" commercial that sought to make voters nervous about Spiro Agnew,
Richard M. Nixon's running mate. "The ad should say, 'Which of these two men do
you want a heartbeat away from the Presidency: Quayle or Gore?' " Mr. Schwartz
said. "It is very meaningful when you talk about how many of the last Vice
Presidents became President."

Joseph Napolitan, who also helps Democratic candidates, says they should exploit
the idea that Mr. Bush is out of touch with ordinary Americans.

A script he dreamed up opens with scenes from the Depression, cuts to a preppie
emerging from a limousine with his school books, and then to Mr. Bush emerging
from Air Force One and into a limousine. The announcer says "Some people never
come into contact with the realities of life," recalls that young George Bush
was chauffeured to school in Greenwich, Conn., and says he still doesn't
understand poverty, hunger or unemployment.

Mr. Napolitan, who has been in the business for decades, counsels subtlety to
his younger peers.  "We tried to sneak in with a stiletto," he said.  "Today,
they're hitting with a sledgehammer."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Merely Mortal;
Bunch That Lunched On Democrats Is Missing Its Edge

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


NOT long ago, giants roamed the earth here. They were Republicans, meat-eaters
in yellow ties, and the ground shook when they walked. They made dinner of
George McGovern, lunch of Walter Mondale and a toothsome snack of Michael
Dukakis.

They ran Presidential campaigns that were models of brutal efficiency, offering
voters simple, attractive promises -- read my lips, kill the bureaucrats,
morning in America -- while so skillfully exploiting even the smallest
weaknesses of their opponents that paper cuts became chest wounds.

When Bill Clinton -- the little-known Governor of a small, poor state, and a man
best known for, as he put it, "a woman I didn't sleep with and a draft I didn't
dodge" -- won the Democratic primaries, it was widely assumed the Republicans
would turn him into Spam.

Now it is almost October, the beginning of the last five weeks of the 1992 race,
and it has come to this:

On a classic Republican picture-perfect platform -- in front of a two-story
American flag hanging from the grand Old Main building at Pennsylvania State
University -- the President of the United States is ripping "the failed governor
of a small state" up one side and down the other. The ostensible point is to
depict Mr. Clinton as a tax-and-spend, big-government liberal. But the equally
important half-spoken theme is to suggest that the Oxford-educated Democrat is
somehow un-American: unpatriotic, vaguely socialist, European-ish.

To this end, the Bush campaign has unearthed a doozy of a damning Clinton quote.
And so, the President demands to know of the absent Mr. Clinton just "what the
heck he's talking about when he describes a President's -- quote -- here's what
he called it: a President's powerless moments when countries are invaded,
friends are threatened, Americans are held hostage, and our nation's interests
are on the line."

Mr. Bush goes on to denounce Mr. Clinton with fine, finger-pointing scorn.
"Well, let me say, Governor Clinton: If America is powerless when our nation's
interests are on the line, who else do you suppose is going to take care of us?
My America is not powerless. My America takes care of its interests. And when we
have to fight, we're willing to do it if the cause is just."

But as reporters quickly discover, Mr. Bush has gotten one crucial word wrong.
What Mr. Clinton spoke of in his Aug. 13 speech before the Los Angeles World
Affairs Council was not America's "powerless moments," but its "perilous" ones.

Oops.

The small incident of the one wrong word is symptomatic of the state of things
as the 1992 campaign enters its end game.

The Republicans, it sometimes seems, can do nothing right. The Democratic
ticket, headed by a man who has beaten so many bullets that he seems made not so
much of Teflon as Kevlar, can't seem to step wrong. In this city, where politics
is the armchair sport of choice, it suddenly seems to many people in both
parties that the game is all but over.

The truth is more hedged than that. Heading into October, the month that will
decide the thing, it is clear that Mr. Clinton enjoys a great advantage,
composed of more or less equal measures of his opponent's mistakes and his own
skills. But Mr. Clinton is sitting on his lead, and it is a soft and precarious
perch.

In his case, more precarious than most. No Presidential candidate in recent
memory has been dogged by more questions of character, and no one (except
perhaps Mr. Clinton) knows if there are more questions waiting out there. Just
yesterday, campaigning in New England, the candidate found himself again facing
reporters' questions about how he managed to avoid the draft during the Vietnam
War, in the wake of a Los Angeles Times article asserting that Mr. Clinton had
been the beneficiary of a lobbying effort directed at the head of the Arkansas
Selective Service that succeeded in getting his induction notice canceled in the
summer of 1969.

Nevertheless, in Republican circles the mood is almost irredeemably grim.

The overall assessment by many Republican activists of the campaign waged thus
far by Mr. Bush's strategists is fairly, if unkindly, encapsulated by the
political analyst Kevin Phillips: "These guys are so out to lunch, they ought to
be on a menu."

Taking the offensive far too late, Mr. Phillips argues, the Bush campaign has
compounded its error by attempting in the profoundly uncontented year of 1992
the sort of sharply negative techniques that worked in the balmier days of 1988.

"They love the gimmick," says a veteran (and anonymous, which is why he is a
veteran) Washington political creature who has played in both camps. "And they
get by with it, but the public is smarter than that. Sometimes, when you have
been in office too long, you start to think the public are all fools, and that
you can sell them anything."

There is a widespread view, privately admitted within the Bush campaign and
publicly acknowledged by non-Bush Republicans, that the Bush campaign erred, in
an oddly Dukakis-like way, by allowing the other side to get too big a lead on
attack, while doing too little to counter-punch.

Slouching Toward October

"They waited much too long," said the former Reagan strategist Lynn Nofziger.
"It was as if Bush was waiting for the bell to ring, and didn't notice that it
had gone off two minutes ago and this other guy had come out in the center of
the ring and was kicking the hell out of them."

But it is still September, in a year when a great number of unexpected things
have happened and more could still. One possibility, expected by some as early
as tomorrow, is the re-introduction of the independent candidate Ross Perot into
the race.

Autumn, the great sober period of the Presidential election cycle -- after the
cold, confused slogging of the winter primaries and the beery, overblown hoopla
of the summer conventions -- has arrived. It is now, as the Republican
consultant Ed Rollins sees it, that the average American voter begins to pay
detailed attention, and to ask about Mr. Clinton, "Do I really want to marry
this guy?"

In that question, some Republicans see hope, not because of anything the Bush
campaign is doing so well, but because of complacency in the Clinton strategy,
the hubris that has created a parade of job-seekers in Little Rock, and a flurry
of speculative calls to the real estate brokers who handle the moderately
moneyed neighborhood of Chevy Chase, D.C., a favorite of Democratic arrivistes.

The commanding edge Mr. Clinton enjoys in the polls, these Republicans say,
masks a weakness. Because the Democratic candidate is still only a vague figure
to many, and because he suffers from a broad perception that he is not entirely
trustworthy, there is room still to erode his lead.

Mr. Phillips sees Mr. Bush as the likely loser in November, but says Mr.
Clinton's approach yet retains the seeds of potential defeat. "I can conceive of
Bush winning still because of this one thing, that Clinton is trying to run out
the clock, sit on his lead," he said. "That's a weakness. In a year where there
is great cynicism, the key will belong to the candidate who does not scoff at
the voters."

But it may be that the Clinton campaign, which has proven its adaptability
throughout the year, has already recognized this. The candidate's schedule,
which had indeed been fairly light in recent weeks, was once again this weekend
filled with public events from early in the morning until late at night.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SEPT. 20-27;
A Hearing for the Missing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


IN three days of Senate committee hearings last week on American servicemen who
failed to return from the war in Indochina, an array of Nixon Administration
officials all acknowledged that there was a good chance some men had been left
behind when Hanoi returned 591 prisoners of war in early 1973.

Henry A. Kissinger, National Security Adviser and chief negotiator with the
Vietnamese at the time, angrily denied that the Administration had knowingly
abandoned anyone, but he admitted that the issue was of major concern to him by
early February 1973, two weeks after the signing of the Paris peace agreement.
Mr. Kissinger presented Hanoi with a "discrepancy list" on Feb. 11; others
followed in the succeeding months.

The Senate Select Committee on P. O. W. -M. I. A. Affairs, which has
successfully declassified thousands of secret documents, has largely put to rest
old theories about the Government covering up the existence of hundreds of
prisoners. But more questions are being asked about what happened to those
prisoners -- perhaps 40 to 80 cases -- who might have survived the war, only to
disappear later, especially in Laos.

Pressed for explanations for apparent American inaction, Mr. Kissinger blamed
Congress, the anti-war movement and the press for tying the Administration's
hands in talks with the North Vietnamese.

"In response to my presentations, Le Duc Tho disdainfully read me editorials
from the American press and speeches from the Congressional Record," Mr.
Kissinger said. "His message was clear: I understand what you are saying, but I
also know that you have no way to back up your threats."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger testifying last
week at Senate hearing on American prisoners of war. (Stephen Crowley/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making 'Refugee Experience' Less Daunting

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1755 words


With less than 24 hours' notice, Lang Ngan, a 29-year-old clerk at the United
States Embassy in Saigon, boarded an evacuation plane with her parents and six
young siblings and left Vietnam forever on April 26, 1974. Just minutes after
take-off, pale and panicked, she told her littlest brothers and sisters that
life might be too tough in America for the family to stick together.

"I told them we might have to put them up for adoption," Mrs. Ngan said. "They
were sad. They said to make sure I sent them my address."

Eighteen years after fleeing her homeland, Mrs. Ngan, her cheeks plump and rosy,
now earns a living as a kind of expert refugee, as do hundreds of older
political refugees who have settled in this country. Having succeeded in keeping
her own family intact, Mrs. Ngan is now paid to pass on the wisdom of her
experience to emigres of a new generation, most recently Ethiopians, Liberians
and Somalians.

"I have to read books about their culture and geography, also to find out what
are their customs," said Mrs. Ngan, a refugee caseworker with the International
Rescue Committee. "After that, I find they're like us -- arranged marriages, eat
a lot of rice, scared their children will go in wrong direction, freezing cold
in climate, don't speak English. The refugee experience is the same thing no
matter where you come from -- frustration, culture shock, sadness, upset
stomach."

As the refugees of the 1990's pour into New York City from Southeast Asia,
Russia, Yugoslavia, Albania, Haiti and elsewhere, an established cadre of
political refugees, Mrs. Ngan among them, buffers the shock. As volunteers and
professionals at the city's resettlement agencies, they form a tough-minded
empathy squad, softened and hardened by their experience, committed to the
newcomers that larger society often ignores.

In their work, the counselors go way beyond the bureaucratic tasks of helping
new refugees get Social Security cards, apply for food stamps, and register for
the draft (which is mandatory). They also induct them into American culture,
advising them to keep their money in banks, to be wary of strangers and to look
people in the eyes during conversation. And the older refugees help them
shoulder the stress of beginning a new life when the old one ended so painfully.

"These poor people need a lot of help," Mrs. Ngan said. "They have medical
problems -- tuberculosis, malnutrition. And they have emotional problems --
think of the Vietnamese women raped by Thai pirates, the Cambodians whose
relatives died at the hands of Pol Pot, the Ethiopians who watched their
children die of hunger. And then they arrive here, and they have to learn how to
ride the subway and flush a toilet and call 911 for emergencies."

'Fear of Persecution'

The experience of the political refugee is distinct from that of the immigrant.
Immigrants plan their migration. They choose to leave home, and choose to go to
the United States, usually to improve their standard of living. Refugees simply
flee. By legal definition, they are running from "a well-founded fear of
persecution." They cannot go home again.

As a result, refugees often arrive in the United States traumatized about their
past, muddled about their future. Decades down the road, they may well be
adjusted to their new country, but their experience has marked them. Many cannot
or do not want to forget their suffering. In addition to their desire to remain
in contact with their homeland and its culture, many refugees seek to remain in
touch with the refugee experience.

"I made a pact with my soul that if I ever escaped, I would never forget," said
Jonathan Lee, 39 years old, a Vietnamese refugee who resettles his countrymen
for the New York Association for New Americans. "And by hearing the stories over
and over, believe me, I never do."

Tremendous Changes

Mr. Lee keenly remembers his first day in New York City, when he still used his
given name, Sapoth Ly. An ethnic Cambodian who had worked as a nurse in a South
Vietnamese military hospital before 1975, Mr. Lee later suffered constant
harassment at a Communist-run hospital. In 1982, he escaped, by bus, foot and
train, across Vietnam, Cambodia and the border with Thailand. He spent more than
a year in three different refugee camps. And then he crossed from one universe
to another in the whoosh of a flight, landing at Kennedy International Airport
late one night, reporting to his refugee caseworker on Park Avenue early the
next morning.

"I felt like I just fell in from the sky," Mr. Lee said. "On the street, people
rushed by me like they were running from a fire. The tall building of my
caseworker had all these guards with uniforms outside, and the doors were
closed. In my country, you don't dare open a closed door."

Drawing from those experiences, Mr. Lee prepared a list of do's and don'ts for
his clients. He advises them to avoid two healing rituals, "coining" and
"cupping," that are usually misunderstood here. The Vietnamese rub coins over
the face and neck of a child who feels weak, and place cups sterilized with
burning alcohol over their wounds. The redness or temporary scars that sometimes
result concern American teachers, who believe the children have been abused.

A Way of Repaying

Mr. Lee's written summary of precautions for clients includes this advice:
"Don't do drug. Don't hang around with gangsters. Do not abuse children or wife.
Do not gamble. Do not use gun without license."

Some refugees, like Mrs. Ngan and Mr. Lee, have, with compassion, made being a
refugee their trade. Others, like Dr. Manfred Brust, a German Jew who fled
Nazism, pursue other careers but find themselves drawn to volunteer work with
refugees. For some, it is a way of repaying a debt to this country or of finding
a new audience for the stories their family has tired of. For others, it serves
to keep alive memories as the past slips farther away.

"I empathize with you -- do you know the word empathize?" Dr. Brust, 69, asked
Nugzar Kartvelishvili, a recent refugee from the republic of Georgia. "No matter
how American you become, you will always have one toe in Georgia. I myself can't
ever shake the terrible shock of waking up one morning as a German teen-ager and
finding out that because I was Jewish I was criminal and didn't belong anymore."

Mr. Kartvelishvili, who fled the rising nationalism in his country because his
wife is Jewish, extended his arms toward Dr. Brust. "Our situation so much the
same," he said.

Cultural and Social Gaps

Dr. Brust, with his German accent, leads an English conversation class for
refugees from the former Soviet Union, teaching them such "English" words as
chutzpah. ("You will hear this word a lot in New York, not so much in Kansas.")
While Dr. Brust's generation of refugees did not have the benefit of the
cultural orientation programs that exist today, he believes his adjustment was
easier.

"We came from a capitalist-type society, and these people don't remember
anything but Communism," he said. "They have this huge cultural and social gap,
and we just merged right in."

In New York, most of the workers assisting the approximately 18,000 refugees who
arrived here in the last year, are refugees themselves, as are an untold number
of volunteers."

Private Resettlement Efforts

On a national level, some refugee groups -- Cubans, Vietnamese, Ethiopians, and
the Zoroastrians of Iran -- have gone beyond volunteer and social work to
sponsor and subsidize refugees the Government will not admit. In an unusual
private-sector immigration program, they have, with the blessing of the
Government, brought to the United States about 9,000 refugees, the majority of
them Cuban. The resettlement of an individual refugee can cost them from as
little as $1,500 to as much as $9,000.

Last week, at the offices of the International Rescue Committee -- which was
founded in 1933, at the urging of Albert Einstein, to help refugees from
Hitler's Germany -- Mrs. Ngan welcomed a nervous Vietnamese family who had just
left a refugee camp in Thailand. The mother, Hoanh Thi Nguyen, clutched the
white plastic bag that is a sure sign of a newly arrived refugee. It said: IOM,
for International Office of Migration, and contained immigration and vaccination
documents.

The mother told Mrs. Ngan that she had worked as a bargirl during the Vietnam
War, until she met the American father of her 17-year-old daughter. The family
was admitted to the United States because her daughter is Amerasian. In a
special program, more than 11,000 Amerasian children, who face much
discrimination in Vietnam, and their families have come here in the last year.

With tears rolling down her face, the mother told Mrs. Ngan how she had cooked
noodles in the street to support her children, sending her daughter to school
against the wishes of a Vietnamese husband who eventually abandoned the family.
Mrs. Nguyen, who is illiterate, said she wanted only one thing in America -- a
college education for her children.

New Signatures

In Vietnamese, Mrs. Ngan told the children: "Remember always how hard your
mother has worked for your future." They nodded shyly.

Since the first order of business was obtaining Social Security cards, Mrs. Ngan
had to teach the family to sign their names using letters, rather than
pictographs. They practiced over and over on yellow legal pads, their faces
somber.

"All these people have suffered so much more than me," Mrs. Ngan said. "I never
lived under the Communists in Vietnam."

Nonetheless, Mrs. Ngan had it tough enough. When she arrived at the Army's Fort
Chaffee refugee camp in Arkansas, her father was blind, her mother weak and
defenseless at 78 pounds, and four siblings were under the age of 13. Through
grit, luck and her acceptable command of English, she talked her way into a job
in New York as an interpreter. She moved her family of nine into a studio
apartment in Flushing and supported them all.

"You know, I've been having a nightmare many times that I'm stupid -- I go back"
to Vietnam, she said. "And I can't catch a flight out, I can't escape. That is
because of my daily dealing with their stories."

Standing and clearing her throat, Mrs. Nguyen, through an interpreter, said:
"Please, do you understand. We would be lost without this woman. It would be so
difficult."

Mrs. Ngan took the woman's worn hand. "Who knows?" she said. "Maybe 10 years
from now, it may be her turn to sit here and help a new arrival refugee."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lang Ngan, who fled from Vietnam in 1974, is now a refugee
caseworker with International Rescue Comittee. She worked with a Vietnamese
mother, Hoanh Thi Nguyen and her son, Vu Huong Nguyen. (Joyce Dopkeen/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Democrats;
Clinton Again Faces Draft Issue As He Returns to New Hampshire

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Sept. 26


Seven months after a second-place showing in this state's Democratic primary
saved him from political destruction, Gov. Bill Clinton returned today,
triumphant but still dogged by the same questions that nearly destroyed him in
February.

As Mr. Clinton hopscotched through campaign appearances in three New England
states today, reporters peppered the Democratic Presidential nominee with
questions about how he managed to avoid being inducted by the military during
the Vietnam War.

The questions that first arose as a campaign issue days before the February
primary here and have periodically resurfaced, came up again today in the
aftermath of a published account asserting that in the summer of 1969 Mr.
Clinton's Army induction notice was canceled after a lobbying effort directed at
the head of the Arkansas Selective Service.

But Mr. Clinton stayed at least as much on the offensive as on the defensive
today, hitting his opponent hard in speeches in New Hampshire, Vermont and Maine
and in remarks to reporters.

Sharp Attack on Bush

Responding to charges by President Bush today that Mr. Clinton's economic plan
would entail higher taxes for millions of middle-class people and not simply the
rich Americans whom Mr. Clinton has said he intends to tax, the Democrat
responded sharply.

"He has no credibility on taxes, and he can't even count," Mr. Clinton said.
"Everything he says is wrong. He raised taxes on everybody. It's just bull. My
plan is out there. It's clear: we ran it with Congressional Budget Office
numbers."

The question of Mr. Clinton's draft status arose anew today in an article in The
Los Angeles Times that said he had benefited from efforts by a Republican friend
seeking to arrange a meeting between him and Col. Willard A. Hawkins, who had
been appointed by a Republican governor and was director of the Arkansas
Selective Service in 1969.

In the past Mr. Clinton has acknowledged that he cast a wide net in the summer
of 1969 looking for a way to escape induction, but he has always said he did not
do anything improper or receive any special treatment, aside from what might be
expected to be given a Rhodes scholar from small-town Arkansas.

Today, he acknowledged that he might have met with Mr. Hawkins, as The Los
Angeles Times article suggested, but that any such meeting, if it did occur,
would have been part of routine procedure, suggested to him by the local draft
board in Hot Springs.

"They told me what procedures to follow, and I followed their procedures," Mr.
Clinton told reporters after a speech here.

He said he had no recollection of meeting with the director of the Arkansas
Selective Service, but he added: "That doesn't mean it didn't occur. I mean it
could have happened by letter or meeting. I can't say one way or the other,
because I don't know for sure."

Whatever he did, Mr. Clinton said repeatedly today, had been at the suggestion
of the Hot Springs draft board and was strictly "normal procedure."

The draft questions did not appear to mar the Governor's mood, which was notably
upbeat as he spent the day in that most pleasant of political activities,
running ahead in places where he had been expected to be behind.

Neither New Hampshire, where Mr. Clinton spoke first, nor Vermont, where he
spoke next, had voted for a Democratic Presidential nominee since Lyndon B.
Johnson's landslide victory in 1964. Maine, the third stop on the New England
tour, has not gone Democratic since 1968.

This year, Clinton campaign officials say their polls in all three states show
their candidate ahead of Mr. Bush.

Perhaps with these figures in mind, Mr. Clinton struck a note of thanks and
expectant victory in speeches today.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OLD FOES SKIRMISH AT M.I.A. HEARINGS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


Congress and the Nixon Administration, bitter adversaries in 1973 when American
troops withdrew from Vietnam, confronted each other again this week in Senate
hearings that went to the heart of almost every contentious aspect of the issue
of missing American servicemen. The hearings may have changed the substance of
the emotional debate over the boys who didn't come home.

"We're not here to refight the Vietnam War," Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of
Massachusetts and chairman of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs told Henry A. Kissinger, President Nixon's national security adviser and
later Secretary of State. But exchanges were sharp, especially on questions of
how hard Mr. Kissinger had pushed Hanoi to account for missing Americans.

"There is nothing in the record that suggests you asked the Congress of the
United States for the right to bomb because they were holding prisoners that
they wouldn't give back," said Senator Kerry, a Vietnam veteran who joined the
antiwar movement in the early 1970's. "Nothing."

"Mr. Chairman," replied Mr. Kissinger, "for somebody who opposed any military
operations, who was accusing the Government of deliberately prolonging the war,
it does not come as good grace to make this accusation."

Old Myths Put to Rest

When three days of testimony from an array of high-level witnesses before the
select committee were over, 20 years of pent-up hostilities had been aired and
new facts had been revealed about various lists of men the Pentagon or other
agencies of government strongly suspected were in captivity when President Nixon
was declaring all prisoners returned.

After months of testimony and the declassification of previously secret
documents, the committee has largely put to rest old myths about government
conspiracies to cover up the existence of hundreds of Americans still struggling
to escape captivity.

Fewer stories are now told about American prisoners still alive in Indochina.
But more questions are being asked about what happened to those who might have
survived the war, only to disappear later, especially in Laos. The numbers are
not large, perhaps 40 to 80 especially compelling cases. But officials no longer
deny that there were men left behind, only that they were never knowingly
abandoned.

Pressed for explanations for seeming American inaction in forcing a better
accounting of prisoners from Hanoi, Mr. Kissinger angrily turned the tables on
his questioners, charging Congress, the antiwar movement and the press with
hobbling the Administration in talks with the North Vietnamese.

"In response to my presentations, Le Duc Tho disdainfully read me editorials
from the American press and speeches from the Congressional Record," Mr.
Kissinger told the committee. "His message was clear: I understand what you are
saying but I also know that you have no way to back up your threats."

'Bad and Cynical History'

To take away the power to deal with Hanoi, and then blame the Nixon
Administration for not getting a full accounting of prisoners, was "straight
from Kafka," Mr. Kissinger said.

"While it may make good theater, it is bad and cynical history."

But some of Mr. Kissinger's contemporaries, including two former Defense
Secretaries, Melvin R. Laird and James R. Schlesinger, remembered how the
secrecy that surrounded the Nixon-Kissinger team helped poison the atmosphere of
government and the Administration's credibility in the country.

There were secret peace talks behind the facade of open negotiations with Hanoi,
and meetings with Vietnamese leaders that Nixon Cabinet members did not know
about. There was the secret bombing of Cambodia, which outraged Congress
unnecessarily, Mr. Laird said.

The mood of one tortured year, 1973, has been recalled repeatedly in hearings to
illuminate the confusions and passions that surrounded the collapse of the
American war in Indochina.

In early 1973, Mr. Schlesinger, then Director of Central Intelligence before
becoming Secretary of Defense, was spending 70 to 80 percent of his time in
Congress dealing with allegations of C.I.A. involvement in the Watergate
scandal, he told the committee. Another former Defense Secretary, Elliot
Richardson, recalled being preoccupied with NATO and a review of American
strategy in the wake of the Vietnam defeat while trying to pass along to the
President the Pentagon's concern about possible remaining prisoners.

Hanoi's Violations Recalled

In general, Americans were grappling with an unusual national defeat, and the
realization that when a country loses a conflict, it has little power to dictate
the peace.

Hanoi came into focus again this week also, but in a harsh light, as Senators
heard one official after another describe its violations of the Paris peace
agreement and subsequent disregard of American requests for information on
possible prisoners.

Hanoi, moving along the State Department's "road map" to diplomatic recognition
by the United States and the lifting of an American trade embargo, had passed
all the necessary milestones except for one: to demonstrate significant progress
on resolving more of the cases of the missing where evidence points to
Vietnamese knowledge of a serviceman's fate.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
House Leader Acts to Halt Attacks on Clinton

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


Upset by weeks of Republican insults against Gov. Bill Clinton, the Speaker of
the House, Thomas S. Foley, has banned such bashing from the House floor.

Mr. Foley said Thursday that the Arkansas Governor would now be covered under a
House rule barring lawmakers from using the House floor to make derogatory
remarks about the President, Vice President or members of Congress.

The Speaker acknowledged that the House rules allowed lawmakers more freedom to
attack candidates for President and Vice President.

But, he said, "In order to maintain decorum in the House, certain minimal
standards of propriety in debate should apply to all nominated candidates for
President and Vice President."

Within 30 minutes of his pronouncement, though, several Democrats were chastised
for out-of-bounds remarks about President Bush.

Mr. Foley, a Washington Democrat, issued his ban after Representative Cass
Ballenger, Republican of North Carolina, accused Governor Clinton of lying about
avoiding the draft and his participation in protests against the Vietnam War.

"We all know that Bill Clinton has lied about his past," Mr. Ballenger said.
"He'll lie to achieve a personal goal and to maintain his political viability.
The question today is what lies he has told about our future."

The Speaker's aides said the speaker had been bothered for weeks by Republicans'
use of the House floor to attack Mr. Clinton's integrity.

Others Protected

President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the Democratic Vice-Presidential
nominee, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, are all protected from "derogatory,
demeaning or insulting" references under House rules. The only candidate without
such protection was Mr. Clinton.

Republicans offered no immediate challenge to the ban and said the Speaker's
action appeared to be within his powers.

The order does not block Republicans from criticizing Mr. Clinton but does ban
language that is personally offensive. Calling him a liar, for example, is
banned, as is innuendo and ridicule.

Within five minutes of the the order, Representative James A. Traficant Jr.,
Democrat of Ohio, was told by the presiding officer to tone it down after a
sharply worded blast at Mr. Bush.

And only minutes later, Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Connecticut,
was admonished for not expressing his complaints about Mr. Bush in the proper
form.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Kissinger vs. Kerry

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


Vietnam hawks and doves found a new battleground last week -- Senate hearings on
prisoners of war and missing in action. Once again, they left each other and
their country bloodied. One more time, they blinded the nation to fundamental
truths about its long nightmare.

Hawks like Henry Kissinger kept pushing the deception that South Vietnam alone
could have held off the Communists at war's end had not doves denied U.S.
military help. The Kissingers continued to run from the central truth that can
still liberate them and the nation from Vietnam's shadow: South Vietnam lost the
war, not America and not American doves. It was always Saigon's war to win or
lose, though the U.S. lost its wealth, its soul and hundreds of thousands killed
and wounded in giving Saigon a chance.

Doves like Senator John Kerry again ignored the chance to bring home this truth.
Their interest seemed limited to finding a new weapon against hawks, who they
believe dragged the U.S. into the war and then unpardonably prolonged it. Thus
the Kerrys, too, fled from a liberating truth: Liberals and conservatives alike
promoted and supported the U.S. commitment to "save Vietnam from Communism"
until the late 60's. Whoever lied about whatever, that collective responsibility
remains.

All such thoughts were far from everyone's mind when Senator Kerry, a war hero,
decided to look at the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue. His initial idea was to put that
wrenching matter behind the nation and get on with the long process of
normalizing relations with Vietnam.

Somewhere along the way, he found strong suggestions that Hanoi did indeed hold
back servicemen, and that Richard Nixon knew this in 1973 and did nothing to
free them -- supposedly to rush through the politically popular withdrawal of
all U.S. forces in a vain effort to salvage his Presidency from the Watergate
scandal.

Last week's evidence and testimony were often imprecise. News stories compounded
the confusion.

These seem to be the facts: Hanoi did return all confirmed P.O.W.'s in 1973. But
there was evidence then that a number of servicemen listed as M.I.A.'s might
have been alive, mainly in Laos. President Nixon knew this and told Americans
about it in March 1973. But neither he nor Mr. Kissinger pressed the issue
further with the public, despite promptings by some aides.

When Senator Kerry hit Mr. Kissinger with the charge that he had not done all he
could to free servicemen knowingly left behind by the U.S., the former Secretary
of State struck back. People who opposed further U.S. military action at the
time, he said, "cannot now say you didn't get what you only could have gotten by
continuing military operations."

The nerve touched, out came the venom from Mr. Kissinger, Gen. Alexander Haig
and others: The U.S. could have threatened Hanoi over the M.I.A.'s save for the
doves' opposition. Moreover, they argued, South Vietnam could have been saved if
doves had not cut off military action and aid, thus stabbing the Vietnamization
policy in the back.

This was the 1969 policy of withdrawing U.S. forces and turning the war over to
the South Vietnamese. But Vietnamization never could have worked, as David
Halberstam and Stanley Karnow, the great historians of the war, never tire of
explaining.

How could Saigon, corrupt and lacking the mantle of nationalism, stand up to
Hanoi, which, rightly or wrongly, held that mantle? How could South Vietnamese
forces defeat Hanoi when 550,000 U.S. fighters backed by the heaviest bombing in
history could not?

Vietnamization was a fraud. Many hawks sold it simply to create "a decent
interval" or "a fig leaf" between U.S. withdrawal and Saigon's defeat. Many
doves went along with it simply as the most opportune way out.

By 1973, the Nixons and Kissingers wanted out as badly as the Kerrys. And Hanoi
knew it. The U.S. thus had no leverage over Hanoi to free captive servicemen, if
there were any, let alone to go on postponing Saigon's inevitable fate.

Americans had freely chosen to do all they reasonably could -- and so much more
-- to prevent or delay that day. By 1973, with costs still mounting and no end
in sight, they had had enough. These truths are plain. Yet hawks and doves are
not willing to settle for them, not now, perhaps never.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price;
Founders' Wisdom

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


To the Editor:

Enough already about Bill Clinton and the Vietnam draft! The Bush re-election
campaign continues to variously assert that a person must have experience in the
United States military to be a respected and competent Commander in Chief. In
other words, since Bill Clinton did not serve in the Vietnam War he is
unqualified to be President and unsuited to make the momentous decision of
sending American troops into combat.

This tired refrain reflects a serious ignorance of American Presidential and
military history, unworthy of any incumbent President.

The U.S. has declared war on five occasions during its 203-year history: the War
of 1812; the Mexican-American War; the Spanish-American War, World War I and
World War II.

Of the Presidents who made the difficult decision to place American troops in
harm's way, only William McKinley had any experience in the military. None of
the others, not James Madison (father of the Constitution), James K. Polk,
Woodrow Wilson or Franklin D. Roosevelt ever served in the military; neither did
Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of Independence.

Indeed, Abraham Lincoln's only military experience, prior to serving as
Commander in Chief during the Civil War, was three months of service in the
Illinois militia. Lincoln did not volunteer to serve in the Mexican-American
War; instead his inaugural speech to the House of Representatives in 1847 was a
condemnation of "Polk's War."

If we were to apply the Bush campaign's standard for service as President, none
of these great Americans would ever have become President. Even Lincoln, founder
of the Republican Party, might have been excluded.

If the Founders intended all future Presidents to have served in the military,
they would have specified such in Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution.
They did not and for good reason. Military service is neither a necessary
condition for becoming President nor is it a good predictor of how well an
individual will serve as President.

MARK P. PETRACCA
Assoc. Prof. of Political Science
University of California
Irvine, Calif., Sept. 15, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Draft Evasion Means Others Pay the Price;
Clinton to Explain

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 476 words


To the Editor:

William Broyles Jr. deserves respect and admiration for the difficult choice he
made in going to Vietnam ("Clinton Wouldn't Enlist. He Was Right," Op-Ed, Sept.
22), but he fails to answer the major questions surrounding Gov. Bill Clinton's
various deferments from the Vietnam War.

Almost everyone who attended college in the United States in the late 1960's,
especially at the most prestigious private universities, where draft avoidance
was the norm, also had to wrestle with the difficult moral choices posed by the
military draft.

A few of us, like Mr. Broyles and myself, served in the armed forces in
Southeast Asia or outside that theater; others sought to fulfill their
obligation through alternative service as conscientious objectors; some fled to
Canada to escape the draft; a few, like Joan Baez's husband, went to jail rather
than serve in the war.

Most of the young men who were at university in this generation, however, sought
some other form of deferment that did not pose these difficult choices. Many of
us who served during this period today have great respect for those who chose
very painful and burdensome options that did not include military service.

Because of the varied ways in which Mr. Clinton has explained his own experience
during this period of his life, many of us believe he was one who went to
extraordinary ends to insure that he did not have to serve in Vietnam and that
he would not really have to make the very difficult choices others were forced
to make.

While this may be no different from what most of Mr. Clinton's peers did during
the war, Americans have the right to expect that someone who aspires to be
President subscribes to a higher code of honor and morality.

Mr. Broyles maintains that Bill Clinton's "wrestling with the moral issues of
service in Vietnam" is "more valuable than Dan Quayle's avoiding Vietnam by
quietly serving in the National Guard." Would Mr. Broyles also maintain that Mr.
Clinton's moral wrestling is more valuable than the experience of thousands of
men in the U.S. Navy, many of whom also sought enlistment in the 1960's as a way
to insure sea duty, and thereby lessen the chances they would be sent into
Vietnam's jungles?

Would he also say that it was more valuable than the experience of those like
Senator Al Gore, who served as a reporter with an engineer battalion in Vietnam
in relative safety? The question of what did and did not provide a deferment
from combat service in Vietnam poses a very slippery slope that Mr. Broyles and
others should attempt to climb only with great caution.

All Americans, especially we in the Clinton-Broyles generation, do have a right
to express an opinion and to ask that Mr. Clinton now honestly explain himself
and his motives during the Vietnam War.

ROGER A. BROOKS
Bethesda, Md., Sept. 22, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 27, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Bush Moves Veterans Secretary Into Campaign Job

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: BOWLING GREEN, Ohio, Sept. 26


Under mounting pressure from dissatisfied veterans groups, President Bush today
removed Edward J. Derwinsky from his post as Secretary of Veterans Affairs, a
cabinet position, and gave him a largely ceremonial role in his re-election
campaign.

Because Mr. Bush prizes loyalty above all and is slow to remove faithful
supporters from political positions, dismissing a member of his cabinet under
pressure this late in the campaign seemed a clear signal that anxiety is
mounting in the Bush organization.

The White House, which announced Mr. Derwinsky's resignation as Mr. Bush
campaigned by train through Ohio and Michigan, distributed a letter in which the
President praised Mr. Derwinsky's "determination" and loyalty.

But it was clear that Mr. Derwinsky had become a political liability, and
Administration officials said he had been forced to resign his post.

Mr. Bush has been avidly courting the support of veterans groups as he seeks to
shore up his flagging political base. But that support has been very meager.

At an appearance with Mr. Bush at an American Legion conference in Chicago in
August the audience booed loudly when Mr. Derwinsky was introduced. And the
Veterans of Foreign Wars, a group that endorsed Mr. Bush in 1988, withheld its
support this year and made it clear that Mr. Derwinsky's tenure as Veterans
Secretary was to blame.

The group said it agreed with Mr. Bush on a number of issues, including his
performance in foreign and military affairs, but wanted an Administration that
was more sensitive and sympathetic to their concerns.

Veterans groups have complained about Mr. Derwinsky's management of the Veterans
hospital system and have grown angry at discussion of proposals to use the
hospitals to treat nonveterans as well as veterans. Veterans of the Persian Gulf
war have said that the Bush Administration has been particularly unresponsive to
their needs.

Mr. Derwinsky will become Deputy Chairman for Ethnic Coalitions of the
Bush-Quayle campaign, a post that with only 36 days remaining in the campaign
could have little more than symbolic meaning.

The loss of the support of Veterans groups has been vexing to the Bush
reelection team, not only because the Veterans represented what Bush aides had
considered a safe constituency, but also because much of the President's
re-election bid is predicated on his argument that he alone has the experience,
credentials and credibility to be Commander in Chief.

The Bush campaign has been especially assiduous in reminding veterans and
military groups that Gov. Bill Clinton avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.

At an appearance before the Disabled American Veterans Convention in Reno, Nev.,
recently, Mr. Bush also suggested that Mr. Clinton was planning to dismantle the
veterans health system.

Mr. Clinton has made no such proposal.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 28, 1992, Monday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the resignation of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs
incorrectly rendered his name in some copies. He is Edward J. Derwinski.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 28, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Powell Delivers a Resounding No On Using Limited Force in Bosnia

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1514 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


Reflecting a debate about the use of United States forces in regional conflicts,
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is questioning even the most limited
forms of military intervention to protect the Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina
or to try to stop the fighting.

In a lengthy and sometimes emotional interview, the Chairman, Gen. Colin L.
Powell, offered a strong defense of his philosophy that military force is best
used to achieve a decisive victory and for the first time publicly explained his
reluctance to intervene in Bosnia.

The remarks are the most recent and vivid example of a behind-the-scenes debate
in the Bush Administration over the use of force. The debate is being joined by
lawmakers and former Bush Administration officials who contend that the Pentagon
has an "all or nothing" doctrine for using force that is increasingly irrelevant
to a world in which violent nationalism and ethnic conflict have supplanted
superpower hostilities.

Balkans the Thorniest Case

Explaining how his doctrine applies to the Balkans, which have become the most
pressing and thorniest test case because of the mounting evidence of atrocities,
General Powell assailed the proponents of limited military intervention to
protect the Bosnians.

The general questioned the immediate need to establish an air-exclusion zone
over Bosnia like those the United States has imposed over parts of Iraq, where
the Pentagon sees less risk. The United States and its allies are discussing
setting up such a zone. u

General Powell also angrily rejected suggestions by former Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher of Britain and others that the West undertake limited air
strikes to deter the Serbs from shelling Sarajevo and continuing their attacks.

General Powell said: "As soon as they tell me it is limited, it means they do
not care whether you achieve a result or not. As soon as they me tell me
'surgical,' I head for the bunker."

Though it has largely been fought out of public view, the debate over the use of
force has affected American diplomacy toward the Balkans. When Administration
officials prepared a diplomatic protest to the Serbs asking them to stop
shadowing relief flights with their combat planes, military and civilian
officials at the Pentagon softened the language to remove any implicit threat to
take military action.

Pentagon officials say that General Powell was the first to suggest that a
protest be made and that the episode shows that the State Department was too
quick to threaten force because of frustrations with the diplomatic process. But
some Administration officials say that the Pentagon is too reluctant to develop
military options.

Though General Powell's philosophy on using force is widely shared by senior
officers, who recall the Vietnam quagmire, he is the most prominent and
articulate proponent. Defining the conditions when the use of force is
appropriate, the general said: "It is not so much a doctrine as an approach to
any crisis or situation that comes along. It does not say you have to apply
overwhelming force in every situation. What it says is that you must begin with
a clear understanding of what political objective is being achieved."

Once the political objective is clear, General Powell said, the next step is to
determine the proper military means, whether the objective "is to win or do
something else."

"Preferably, it is to win because it shows you have made a commitment to
decisive results," he said. "The key is to get decisive results to accomplish
the mission."

Two Actions Are Cited

Most military analysts say that General Powell's approach served the United
States well in the invasion of Panama and the Persian Gulf war, where
overwhelming military force was used to achieve a quick victory with minimal
American casualties. But critics say that the Pentagon's doctrine seems intended
to fight the last war, a no-holds-barred air and land war, rather than the next
war, where force might be used selectively, not to vanquish an enemy, but to
slow aggression stemming from ethnic conflicts and bolster diplomacy to end the
fighting.

Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee,
said: "If we say it is all or nothing and then walk away from the use of force
in the Balkans, we are sending a signal to other places that there is no
downside to ethnic cleansing. We are not deterring anybody." Serbian forces in
Bosnia have been accused of widespread "ethnic cleansing" -- killing or
expelling members of other ethnic groups.

And Richard Schifter, the senior State Department official for human rights in
the Reagan Administration and the early part of the Bush Administration,
asserted that the American military was haunted by a "Vietnam syndrome" that had
paralyzed its response to the killing in Bosnia.

"It is the Vietnam syndrome -- the idea that you don't get involved in any
application of military force unless it is overwhelming and the purpose is to
win a 'victory,' " Mr. Schifter said. "In order to get the Serbs to negotiate
seriously, we and our allies have to be prepared to use force, such as
establishing a no-fly zone or engaging in air strikes against military targets."

Normally calm and collected, the general spoke angrily as he complained about
the impetuousness of civilians, who he said had been too quick to place American
forces in jeopardy unwisely for ill-defined missions.

"These are the same folks who have stuck us into problems before that we have
lived to regret," General Powell said. "I have some memories of us being put
into situations like that which did not turn out quite the way that the people
who put us in thought -- i.e., Lebanon, if you want a more recent real
experience, where a bunch of marines were put in there as a symbol, as a sign.
Except those poor young folks did not know exactly what their mission was. They
did not know really what they were doing there. It was very confusing. Two
hundred and forty-one of them died as a result."

In the debate over using military force in the Balkans, the most pressing issue
is an air-exclusion zone in Bosnia.  The United States and its allies have
already said that they are prepared to use force to insure the delivery of
relief supplies. But threatening force to clear the skies of Serbian planes
would cross a new threshold.

Proponents of an air-exclusion zone say it would insure that Serbian planes do
not resume shadowing relief flights and would also be the first commitment of
Western combat power to protect the Bosnians from Serbian air attack. Only the
Serbian side has combat aircraft.

White House and State Department officials have been supportive of the concept,
but the Pentagon has been wary, Administration officials say, fearing that it
could be the first step toward deeper involvement and could lead to Serbian
retaliation against the United Nations relief effort.

'Serious Threat' to Flights

In the interview, General Powell questioned the immediate need to threaten force
against Serbian aircraft. He said the Serbian practice of shadowing relief
flights rarely put the flights in danger. In contrast, the State Department
spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, has said the Serbian shadowing has been a
"serious threat to the safety of United Nations flights."

General Powell also noted that he pressed for the diplomatic protest, or
demarche, which was delivered this month, asking the Serbs to stop the
shadowing. "Before we start shooting up everybody just so everybody can have
something to write about, let's see if the demarche works," he said.

He played down the significance of stopping Serbian combat attacks from the air.
"With respect to dropping cluster bombs, that is reprehensible," he said. "But
so is killing French soldiers with an AK-47. The question is: Are you
intervening for the purpose of achieving a result or are you intervening because
you do not like a particular weapon system that is being used? I think that is a
legitimate question to ask before you apply the armed forces of the United
States to the situation."

General Powell also rejected suggestions for limited bombing attacks against
Serbian artillery and other military targets. "I do not know how limited bombing
will stop the Serbs from doing what they are doing," he said.

The general argued that it would be difficult to locate and destroy all of the
Serbian artillery, that intervention would mean Washington was taking sides in
the conflict, and that the warring parties might retaliate against the United
Nations relief effort.

General Powell also expressed concern that limited military action would be a
prelude to greater involvement.

But some lawmakers and Administration officials say the United States can define
in advance the limits of its involvement and need not be drawn inexorably to
military escalation.

"Those who disagree with the all-or-nothing school are unwilling to accept the
notion that military force can't be used prudently short of all-out war," Mr.
Aspin noted in a recent speech.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I do not know how limited bombing will stop the Serbs from
doing what they are doing," Gen. Colin L. Powell said in a recent interview.
(Michael Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 28, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Republicans;
Bush Focuses on Patriotism as He Warns of Clinton

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: WIXOM, Mich., Sept. 27


President Bush leaned into the microphones attached to the platform of his
campaign train this morning and warned of economic disaster for a small Michigan
town that relies on a Lincoln Continental plant for survival.

If Gov. Bill Clinton has his way with automobile pollution standards, Mr. Bush
shouted, he will "toss 40,000 auto workers out on the unemployment line right
here in Michigan."

A few miles along the track, in Milford, Mr. Bush evoked themes of patriotism
and national pride. "I am proud that because of our leadership we have far less
fear of nuclear weapons today," he said, declaring America "the greatest country
on the face of the earth" and accusing Mr. Clinton of trying to "tear down
America."

Borrowing Reagan Imagery

All down the line in Ohio and Michigan, Mr. Bush tried to recapture the
soft-focus imagery that put Ronald Reagan back in office in 1984, yearning for
an America where "every day has that spirit of the Fourth of July."

And he summoned scary images of Mr. Clinton's "socialist" economic ideas and the
"liberal guys" who Mr. Bush said evaded the Vietnam draft and now want to invade
the "real America" to tear apart the traditions of the largely white,
blue-collar precincts through which Mr. Bush's train rolled this weekend.

Touring these safely Republican districts, Mr. Bush tried to plug into every
political channel he could find.

The train trip was part of that effort, as was Mr. Bush's removal of a Cabinet
member, Secretary of Veterans Affairs Edward J. Derwinski, on Saturday under
pressure from veterans' groups.

But aboard the train, behind the noise and movement, the Bush campaign seemed
suspended, waiting for something to change and hoping it is not too late. The
President's aides now say privately they are even hoping for the re-entry of
Ross Perot into the Presidential race. As dangerous as that might prove to be,
the aides say it would at least shake things up.

Trying to Show Relaxation

Mr. Bush seemed intent on appearing relaxed and confident this weekend. But the
state of his nerves was evident in the way he sent aides into the train to pick
out reporters and usher them into his car in pairs, as one aide put it, "to see
how much fun the President is having."

In his car, with its plush upholstery and mirrored windows, the President
propped up his feet and waved to onlookers outside. "We've got time left," Mr.
Bush said. "We're going to win it. You don't believe us."

With a correspondent who had been reporting on the Clinton campaign for some
time, Mr. Bush seemed eager to show that his campaign had the same energy and
support. "You're going to eat a lot of crow," he said.

He talked about Prime Minister John Major's come-from-behind re-election in
Britain this spring. "I'm not wavering one tiny bit," he said, while Barbara
Bush tried to change the subject to "all those lovely houses" along the route
and, apropos of nothing in particular, to whether the animal "llama" was spelled
with one "l" or two.

Onlookers gathered at virtually every crossing to watch the train go by with the
Presidential standard snapping from a pole above the locomotive. They stood on
rooftops to wave, leaned over their backyard fences to cheer and held up signs,
most friendly.

But there were also knots of Clinton supporters and pockets of discontent. At
one spot in rural Ohio on Saturday evening, near a hard-scrabble mobile home
park, three barefoot children stood by a sign that said, "Buddy, we need jobs."

Efficient Presentation

The weekend's events were efficiently executed. Aides released clouds of red,
white and blue balloons precisely on cue, set off fireworks that dropped tiny
American flags on tinier parachutes and bused in brass bands to every stop. The
crowds were large, friendly and often enthusiastic.

But even among these committed Republicans, there was an air of expectations not
quite fulfilled.

"I'm a little nervous about the polls," said Teresa Goins, 30 years old, of
Marysville, Ohio, as she and her husband, David, tried to summon an enthusiastic
endorsement for their candidate. "No, I AM enthusiastic," she said. "I mean it.
He's done a really O.K. job as President."

Mr. Goins said he did not understand why Mr. Bush's campaign still seemed to be
misfiring. "Why have they been so slow? Like after the hurricane, somebody
should have realized that they had to hit a home run."

Searching for the Public Mood

This is not the first time the Republican campaign has become frozen, waiting
for some event -- for Mr. Bush to name his campaign team, to give his State of
the Union Message, to hold his nominating convention and finally to bring his
old friend James A. Baker 3d back into the White House.

But the problem may run deeper than simply timing. Some of Mr. Bush's friends
and associates say the President has trouble reading the mood of the public as
the pace of the election accelerates. In this year, that is an especially
dangerous thing.

In recent days, Mr. Bush has all but abandoned his positive oratory in favor of
an increasingly harsh attack on Mr. Clinton.

The attack grew more jeering at every stop. In Bowling Green on Saturday
evening, the President even paused to talk about the Clinton supporter dressed
in a chicken suit who has been showing up at every campaign event in recent days
-- to suggest that Mr. Bush was afraid of a debate.

"I'm not sure if that chicken is from Oxford, England, or if he's the one that
dumps that fecal coliform bacteria into the Arkansas River," Mr. Bush said.

Cecily Kumor, a 38-year-old auto parts manager, clutched two copies of Mr.
Bush's economic pamphlet, "Agenda for American Renewal" at the rally here. "He's
not coming out enough with what he plans on doing," she said. "This is the first
I've seen of his agenda."

Random Attack

At times, especially late in the day as he grew tired and hoarse, Mr. Bush
seemed to stitch his attack lines together in random patterns.

Saturday night, in Plymouth, Mich., he combined the political hot button that
his campaign believes will prove Mr. Clinton's undoing -- his draft record --
with an economic assault on the Arkansas Governor.

"Governor Clinton is already talking about pulling together the 'best and
brightest' -- all the lobbyists, economists, lawyers -- all those guys, liberal
guys that were hanging out with him in Oxford when some of you were over there
fighting and have them solve America's problems," Mr. Bush said.

But Keith Greer, a 64-year-old employee of the Honda plant in Marysville and an
enthusiastic Bush supporter, said he was tired of all the talk about the draft.
"We want to talk about the economy," he said. "I've got 15 grandkids, 10 of them
Navy kids, and they like Bush and not one of them ever talks about the draft."

Living by the demands of his office within a bubble of security and aides, Mr.
Bush had little chance to mix with anyone on this trip and tried to make up for
the lack with local references.

"Others can blow the saxophone," he said in Columbus, "but I'll stand with the
Purple Pride of Pinkerton."

"You try to say that," he shouted triumphantly, as members of the band in
question, from the town of Pinkerington, winced.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A man wearing a chicken costume joined Clinton supporters
yesterday at President Bush's campaign stop in Grand Blanc, Mich. The
unidentified man has been showing up at every campaign event in recent days to
suggest that Mr. Bush is afraid of a debate. (Stephen Crowley/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 28, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For a Film Producer, Success Runs Hard Into Nervousness

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 27


Art Linson is a very nervous movie producer. And who can blame him?

His latest film, "Singles," a romantic comedy set in Seattle, has just opened to
good reviews. And set to open in the next few months are "This Boy's Life," an
adaptation of Tobias Wolff's autobiographical novel starring Robert De Niro and
Ellen Barkin, and "The Specialist," an American remake of the French drama "La
Femme Nikita," which stars Bridget Fonda and Harvey Keitel. The two films are
now being tested before preview audiences.

"This is when a producer is truly at his shakiest," Mr. Linson said the other
day in his spare, sleek office at the Warner Brothers studios in Burbank. You
turn into a bowl of jelly. Completely neurotic."

'A Horrible, Horrible Process'

"One movie out, and two others in previews," he went on. "A horrible, horrible
process. Preview audiences watch the movie and fill out these cards, what they
like, what they don't like. You're suddenly being judged by people who tell you
how to restructure a movie you liked in the first place. You want to scream:
'Please love me! Please love me!' Sort of like Jerry Lewis. It's all a little
embarrassing."

It is highly unusual for a producer to have three movies coming out in such
rapid order. But then the 50-year-old Mr. Linson is a highly unusual producer, a
rapid-talking, energetic tough guy film maker with a tendency for the offbeat.

His films have included "The Untouchables," the 1987 drama, written by David
Mamet and directed by Brian De Palma, about Prohibition-era Chicago; three
virtual cult classics, "Melvin and Howard," the 1980 fable about Howard Hughes
and Melvin Dummar, directed by Jonathan Demme, "Car Wash," the 1976 boisterous
Richard Pryor comedy about a day in the life of a Los Angeles car wash, and
"Fast Times at Ridgemont High," the brash 1982 comedy about high school students
in Southern California. He also produced another De Palma movie, "Casualties of
War," the brutal 1989 drama about the Vietnam War.

'The Mayonnaise in the Sandwich'

Mr. Linson has had his share of successes and flops. But he is among perhaps two
dozen A-list producers -- out of hundreds struggling for years to make a single
movie -- who has managed to consistently churn out risky films that intrigue
critics and audiences.

He is also unusually candid.

"You have to realize that the problem with being a movie producer is that he or
she has no power," he said. "It's a ridiculous fiction that we have power, the
silliest thing I've heard.  We are the mayonnaise in the sandwich. If you
control the talent, you have power. If you control the checkbook you have power.
We are the mayonnaise. It's a silly job.

"Why do you think producers smoke big cigars and drive fancy cars? Because we
have no power. So we can say: 'Hey, wait a minute!  We're not mayonnaise: look
at this Mercedes.' If you want respect, you go somewhere else."

He added: "Look, it pays me well.  I'm lucky, but most producers are starving.
After these pictures come out, who knows? I may have to take my real-estate
exam."

Looking the Part

On the face of it, Mr. Linson, who was born in Los Angeles and has a law degree
from the University of California at Los Angeles, looks like a movie producer.
He is trendily unshaven, wears soft and loose Armani trousers and shirts and
expensive-looking shoes.

He pads easily around an airy beige-walled office with a custom-made plywood
desk, two African grave markers, some antique French chairs from a flea market
in Paris and several posters, leaning against the wall, of his latest films.

But wealth and power are elusive, especially in Hollywood, and he knows it. Like
other top-grade producers, Mr. Linson, who is the president of Knickerbocker
Films, has an arrangement with a big studio, in his case, Warner Brothers, which
pays the salaries of his staff members and makes his movies. Many middle- to
upper-level producers are paid by studios $200,000 to $750,000 a year, and in
some cases far more. Producers share in the net profits of a film, but they
can't count on it, given the way Hollywood studios maintain balance sheets.

A successful producer starts and shapes projects. "The secret of the movie
business is to know who can write," Mr. Linson said. "The writer is key. Not
directors, not actors, but writers. You get good material, you get movies made.
You have to have an instinct for who can write and for a good idea. That's it.
If you don't have those instincts then you better have Mike Ovitz's home number
or something better in your life to do."

Mr. Linson, who is divorced and has two children, has been living for years in
Santa Monica, Calif., with Fiona Lewis, an English actress and writer. Shortly
after law school, he entered the music business before starting to produce films
in the 1970's. His first big success, "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," directed
by Amy Heckerling, was based on the book by Cameron Crowe, who wrote and
directed "Singles." Mr. Linson's next scheduled film, "Ordinary Daylight," is
about an artist going blind. It was written by David Mamet.

"If you're lucky, the real payoff in this job is to work with very talented
people: Mamet, De Niro, Jonathan Demme, De Palma," he said. "The only way to
really judge a producer is to look at his slate of pictures and ask, Are the
people who worked with the producer on a film better for having done so or
worse? Did my presence make the picture better or worse?"

Mr. Linson says he detests the preview process, in which typical audiences see
early screenings of a film in movie theaters and proceed to judge it.

"You're doomed the minute you start cutting your film because 100 kids say they
liked this but didn't like that," Mr. Linson said. "I can't tell you how many
movies would have been ruined by preview cards because the natural impulse of an
audience is to want a happy ending, to reach for what's familiar, not to be
challenged. You really have to lead an audience, not follow them. If you want to
produce interesting films it's really a bore not to be able to take some risks."


NAME: Art Linson

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Art Linson (Steve Goldstein for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words



International A3-11

165 ARRESTED IN DRUG CASE
United States, Colombia and Italy said they had arrested more than 165 people in
several countries on charges related to laundering of money from cocaine sales.
A1

ROCKET CEREMONY CANCELED
Political debate forced the cancellation of a planned commemoration of rocket
technology that enabled Germany to rain missiles on London in World War II.  A1



CHINA TRADE BILL VETOED
In yet another sensitive election issue, President Bush vetoed legislation
tonight that would restrict China's trade with the United States unless the
Chinese improve their records on human rights, free trade and arms
proliferation.  A1

KILLER FREED IN SOUTH AFRICA
Barend Strydom, who methodically killed 22 blacks in a lunch-hour crowd, walked
free after serving less than four years.  A3

Liberia says 300 were killed by rebel forces.  A3

IRAQ WANTS TO TALK OIL
Iraq, in a move apparently aimed at stopping the Security Council from seizing
its frozen financial assets, now says it wants to reopen talks on selling oil.
A5

AN APPEAL TO THE U.N.
Bosnia has appealed to the United Nations Security Council, warning that
Sarajevo could fall to Serbian troops unless Bosnian forces are exempted from a
United Nations arms embargo.  A6

How life has changed for one family in Sarajevo.  A6

167 DIE IN NEPAL PLANE CRASH
A Pakistani Airbus A300 crashed near Katmandu, and no survivors were found. Many
of the passengers were European tourists.  A8

VOICES OF EUROPEANS ON GERMANY
Voices of Europe: Despite nervousness over the great relative strength of the
German economy, several political analysts and thinkers say Europe needs
Germany.  A10

REGRETS OVER CZECH-SLOVAK RIFT
The Czech leader regrets the rift with Slovakia, which is to take effect Jan. 1,
but is confident cordial relations can be maintained.  A11

Jerusalem Journal: Tensions among Ethiopian Jews in Israel.  A4

National A14-21

WOOING AND WAITING
The Bush and Clinton campaigns dutifully courted the supporters of Ross Perot in
Dallas, but the perhaps candidate said he would wait until Thursday before
announcing whether he would re-enter the Presidential race. It was a day
choreographed to highlight Mr. Perot's power in Presidential politics.A1

BUSH HURTING IN MISSOURI
In Missouri, a state that has voted for the winning Presidential candidate every
time this century except in 1956, so many voters have been turned off by the
Republican convention and President Bush that a popular Republican Senator fears
that he too could be swept away in the tide on Election Day.  A19

DESERTER LOOKS AT DRAFT ISSUE
Mention the Vietnam War as an issue in this election to an American military
deserter during the war, and the response is not anger but a roll of the eyes.
"It was the middle-class birthright to explore the many options for avoiding the
draft," says Jack Colhoun, who spent seven years in Canada after deserting.  A20


Ross Perot's supporters stay faithful despite the disappointments.  A18

Political Week: In this campaign, everybody's a cynic.  A18

Turning to a favorite issue, Mr. Bush attacks his rival on crime.  A19

A BATTERED TREASURE
When Hurricane Andrew hit South Florida, nearly everything in the Everglades
National Park was leveled. As the storm debris is cleared, park officials and
environmentalists see a unique opportunity to rethink what the park can and will
be.  A14

The official responsible for disaster relief admits errors.  A14

COLLEGE ADMISSIONS AND RACE
The University of California at Berkeley law school agreed to change its
admission policies so it would no longer discriminate on the basis of race.  A14


PONY TAILS AND COWBOY HATS
Ben Nighthorse Campbell, a Democratic Representative from Colorado running for a
Senate seat, finds an unorthodox image is serving him well in a season of
anti-incumbent sentiment.  A16

OUSTING A SECRETARY
Veterans groups say they pushed for the ouster of Veterans Affairs Secretary
Edward Derwinski, who resigned last week, because they were angry over what they
saw as political slights and steadily eroding health care benefits.  A17

NAVAJO COURT VICTORY
A Federal judge sides with the Navajo tribe and lifts a 26-year-old ban on
building on land that the Hopi tribe claimed for itself.  A21

The Government wants a study on how to improve driving in fog.  A21

Metro Digest B1

POLICE OFFICERS DISCIPLINED
Acting Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly ordered the disciplining of 42 New
York police officers in a harshly critical report condemning police behavior in
a recent demonstration at City Hall.  A1

THE STRANGE CASE OF P.S. 3
After tests, hysteria, a media descent and a frenzied effort to clean up lead, a
Greenwich Village school is set to reopen. But its soul has been badly seared by
the episode, a tangled mix of reality and illusion.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-10

The urbane Philistines and their port of Ashkelon.  C1

Cannibalism in the animal kingdom.  C1

A new gun that uses gas to hurl projectiles.  C1

Fashion Page B7

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

William Stone on his role in "Doktor Faust." C11

Theater: Critic's Notebook on two Washington productions.  C11

Film: "Leolo," from Canada.  C11

The Talk of Hollywood.  C11

Word and Image:
"Flying In to Love," a novel on the
J. F. K. killing.  C16

The new New Yorker.  C16

Sports B8-14

Basketball: Knicks' Kimble shoots for the top.  B9

Columns: Anderson on Nagle.  B9

Football: Shift at safety for Giants.  B9

49ers sign new free agent.  B9

Obituaries D24

Hu Qiaomu, hard-line Chinese Marxist.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Mr. Bush sells out arms control.

Gregory needed the divorce.

David C. Anderson: Police review.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Kissinger, peace and P.O.W.'s.

Russell Baker: Incident at Hyannis.

Mickey Kantor: Tax. Blame. Regret. Elect.

Harold E. Varmus and Marc W. Kirschner: Curbing basic research.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Angry Veterans Groups Say They Made Bush Oust Agency's Head

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


American veterans groups said today that they pushed for the ouster of Veterans
Affairs Secretary Edward J. Derwinski, who resigned last week, because they were
angry over a series of perceived political slights and steadily eroding health
care benefits.

Fearful of further alienating America's 27 million war veterans, a core
constituency of the Republican Party, the Bush Administration said on Saturday
that Mr. Derwinski would resign immediately to join the Bush Presidential
campaign as an adviser on ethnic issues, particularly those involving Eastern
European nationalities.

Relations between Mr. Derwinski, a World War II Army veteran, and the three
major veterans groups -- the American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars and
Disabled American Veterans -- have been stormy since the former Republican
Congressman from Chicago assumed the newly created Cabinet job in 1988. At the
time of his nomination, however, veterans groups believed that with his
experience in Congress Mr. Derwinski would be an effective Secretary.

Although Mr. Derwinski increased the Veterans Affairs budget by $2 billion over
the last two years, to $34 billion this year, he infuriated veterans earlier
this year by proposing to open two veterans hospitals to non-veterans at a time
when veterans officials have complained about declining health-care benefits
because of budget cuts at veterans hospitals.

Booed at Legion ConventionXx

In August, Mr. Derwinski was booed at the American Legion's national convention
in Chicago. At the same time, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, one of the first
groups to endorse Mr. Bush in 1988, called for Mr. Derwinski's resignation, and
earlier this month withheld an endorsement for Mr. Bush in this year's election.

"Derwinski seemed to almost set out to break the backs of veterans groups," said
Larry W. Rivers, executive director of the Veterans of Foreign Wars office in
Washington. The V.F.W. has 2.2 million members.

"Derwinski's resignation didn't insure our support, but keeping him there
guaranteed no endorsement," said one senior V.F.W. official who, speaking on the
condition of anonymity, added that the organization may not endorse either Mr.
Bush or Gov. Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee, this year. It would be the
first time no endorsement had been made since the group's political action
committee was formed in 1979.

Veterans Affairs officials denied today that Mr. Derwinski was forced out
because of his differences with veterans groups, saying instead that it would be
a conflict of interest for him to campaign for Mr. Bush while serving as
Secretary. They quoted Mr. Derwinski's statement on Saturday when his
resignation was announced: "While Secretary I have gone to great lengths to keep
politics out of the V.A. and I do not feel it would be proper to change that
longstanding tradition."

Mr. Derwinski's deputy, Anthony J. Principi, who is well liked by veterans
groups, was named on Saturday as Acting Secretary.

Republican officials said today that Frederic V. Malek, the Bush campaign
chairman, had suggested several weeks ago to Mr. Derwinski, who is 66 years old,
that he resign and take a campaign job.

"Anybody who has talked to any of those veterans groups knows we're dead meat as
long as Ed Derwinski is in there," said one White House official."He's always
prided himself on a sort of 'in your face' approach, and while his policies may
have been right in the fiscal sense, they clearly were wrong in a political
sense."

Liability Into an AssetXx

With Mr. Bush trailing Mr. Clinton in public opinion polls with only six weeks
until Election Day, Republican officials said the White House opted to try to
turn a political liability into a campaign asset. Mr. Derwinski, the son of
Polish-born parents, had been active in foreign issues, first as a member of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, and then as a troubleshooter for Secretary of
State George P. Shultz during the Reagan Administration.

In the 1980's voters of East European Catholic backgrounds swung over in large
part to Reagan and Bush, and they are now crucial to Mr. Bush's chances of
winning such vote-rich states as Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin.

"There's no doubt in my mind that his leaving the post of Secretary was due to
his unhappy relationship with the veterans community," said John F. Heilman,
national legislative director for the Disabled American Veterans, which has 1.2
million members.

Mr. Derwinski has angered veterans groups since he agreed in 1989 to a proposal
from Administration officials investigating missing Americans in Southeast Asia
to send $250,000 in surplus medical equipment to Vietnam.  Many veterans
expressed concern that the equipment would benefit former North Vietnamese
soldiers.

Veterans also expressed concern at a department proposal to create a
Congressionally appointed commission to study the future of the 171-hospital
veterans health-care system, which treats 2.6 million veterans.

A burly, plain-spoken man who wears a crew cut, Mr. Derwinski also got into
trouble by calling women on his staff nicknames like Little Miss Muffet and Zsa
Zsa. (His office nickname was the Big Cheese.) Campaigning for a Republican
Congressional candidate in 1990, he referred to illegal Hispanic immigrants as
wetbacks. He later apologized for the incidents.

But relations with veterans groups hit their nadir last summer when Mr.
Derwinski proposed a pilot program with the Health and Human Services Department
to open two veterans hospitals to non-veterans.

The Secretary maintained that care for veterans would not diminish at the two
sites, an 810-bed hospital in Salem, Va., and a 660-bed hospital in Tuskegee,
Ala., and that poor rural neighbors could also be served.

"He didn't ask for our opinion," Mr. Rivers said. "When we tried to talk to him,
he said, in essence, 'You can talk to me until you're blue in the face, but
that's what I'm doing.' "

In February, less than five hours after the Senate voted 91 to 3 to block the
pilot program, Mr. Derwinski announced he was withdrawing the plan because of
veterans' opposition.

NAME: Edward J. Derwinski

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edward J. Derwinski, who resigned last week as Secretary for
Veterans Affairs. (United Press International)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Off the Trail -- Visits With Americans;
To Ex-Deserter, Urban War Should be the Real Debate

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Jack Colhoun wears a gray pigtail, a modest relic of a life disrupted by seven
years of exile and protest in Canada as a military deserter during the Vietnam
War.

The real pain for him in this year's Presidential campaign is that his old
issue, the war, has emerged only as a kind of grotesque aside in his eyes, a
cynical evasion of far more immediate problems, he says. He cites an issue
haunting America right outside his window here: the nightly specter of
teen-agers shooting at one another with semiautomatic pistols as a symptom of
scandalous national failure.

"I'm not talking urban America in the abstract; I'm talking about my daily life,
the gunfire, two killings in the last two months," says the 47-year-old
freelance political writer and resident of the lethally tattered Capitol Hill
neighborhood.

"I mean, Vietnam? This is an absurd debate," says this voter with a Ph.D. in
American history who scoffs from ground zero at this year's Beltway political
stratagems.

Two Separate Avoidances

At first glance, considerable self-interest might be expected in Mr. Colhoun's
abhorring the latest echo of Vietnam. But he rolls his eyes at the chance to
debate the relative manliness of Bill Clinton and Dan Quayle in their separate
avoidances of the military draft in the long-ago.

They only proved they were veterans in good standing among the Vietnam-era
middle class, says Mr. Colhoun, begging the nation to look with a quick, cold
eye at the statistics of that still unreconciled time and then shift its passion
toward the future, not the past.

"It was the middle-class birthright to explore the many options for avoiding the
draft," he says, recalling a candid, controversial memorandum 27 years ago by
Gen. Lewis B. Hershey, director of Selective Service. He wrote that manpower
needs were only one task of a system that was also "heavily occupied" in
shunting registrants toward deferments and so "developing more effective human
beings in the national interest."

Mr. Colhoun notes, "The statistics clearly show that the vast majority of the
male population of the Vietnam generation found ways within the system to avoid
the war -- entirely legal loopholes built into the system."

"They paid no price, and the numbers are astounding," he says, reading from the
uncontested documentation of the Ford Administration's clemency board. "There
were 26.8 million men in the Vietnam generation and 15.4 million of them were
deferred, exempted or disqualified. Those who served in Vietnam totaled 2.1
million." These, he notes, were largely the urban and rural poor and members of
minorities. "So we're talking 15.4 mil people -- the majority -- who did
something similar to what Bill Clinton did. Bill Clinton did the norm."

Mr. Colhoun, the son of a "patriotic, Republican family," had completed college
as a second lieutenant in the Army R.O.T.C. when he decided the war was unjust,
and when his term for service approached, he took exile in the flow of tens of
thousands to Canada.

In having opted to pay a price of years away and public scorn for his views, Mr.
Colhoun feels closer now to Vietnam veterans than to the majority of men in that
era who found the legal loopholes. "We do need a debate of this issue, but it
should be about reconciliation, not the debate going on now, this year's Willie
Horton diversion from our real problems," he says, stressing truer issues of
economic and sociological breakdown echoing in the gunplay outside his window.

Back in America since a general Presidential pardon 15 years ago, Mr. Colhoun
remains one tough critic of his homeland. On the one hand, he accuses the
Republicans of "chicken-hawk" hypocrisy in pressing the draft issue on Governor
Clinton.

"Dan Quayle, Pat Buchanan, George Will, Newt Gingrich -- all these people were
for the war," he says, enumerating a Beltway group, including bipartisan scores
in Congress, who were part of the legally spared male majority. "They thought it
was great; it's just that someone else would fight it for them. Bill Clinton at
least was opposed to the war and didn't want to fight it. He can't make this
point now because he wants the votes of the Bubbas and the 'burbs, the Reagan
Democrats."

On the other hand, Mr. Colhoun accuses Mr. Clinton of skirting discussion of the
urban decay and violence that are the most tangible symptoms of the economic
issue. "I have to say he's two-faced and doesn't want to talk about the ills of
urban America, because that means talking about black America, and he's afraid
of alienating those Bubbas and 'burbs," says this voter, who is debating whether
to leave his Presidential ballot blank.

Time has left Jack Colhoun something of a gray-bearded expert on the guilt that
lurks around the Vietnam era, and this year he finds it decidedly
undifferentiated.

"My own feeling is that whenever any male has an opinion on this issue --
whether a journalist or a politician -- they ought to say up front, like a
Surgeon General's warning, 'This is what I did in Vietnam.' "

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jack Colhoun, who spent seven years in exile in Canada in
protest of the Vietnam War, says he now feels closer to the veterans who served
than to those who escaped through legal loopholes. He visited the memorial
sculpture by Joseph Hart in Washington last week. (George Tames for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Kissinger, Peace and P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


In the winter of 1973, the Nixon-Kissinger team and its most passionate American
enemies were in agreement on one overriding judgment: The war in Vietnam was
lost and had to be ended.

About 17 years earlier, President Eisenhower had begun sending military advisers
and intelligence operators into Vietnam -- the first American involvement. Then
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson each chose to deepen a war that tore apart
American society long before it was over.

Richard Nixon became the only President to try, almost desperately, to end the
war through negotiation. Without Henry Kissinger those negotiations would not
have started, or ended in a peace agreement.

Two decades later Americans still want and deserve a full accounting of any U.S.
prisoners of war not freed, and what was done about them, or left undone.

But the value of the Senate hearings on P.O.W.'s will be ruined if they become
just one more arena for politicians, academics and journalists who cherish their
vendetta against Mr. Kissinger, one more chance to treat a man without whom the
peace agreement would have been impossible as some unindicted conspirator.

The very fact that he dares defend himself -- with a kind of professional,
respectful contempt -- enrages them even more.

To select Mr. Kissinger as the target is unfair historically. And it lessens the
chances of two central realities being made clear. One is that the villain was
Hanoi, now cuddly Hanoi. Only the Communists could have kept any Americans
hostage.

The other is that through callousness or sloth, every Administration during and
since the war failed to clarify the P.O.W. story -- else we would not still be
asking questions.

As a condition of peace, Mr. Kissinger insisted on a Communist commitment to
release all prisoners. Maybe tougher safeguards could have been written into the
agreement. Would Congress and the peace activists have accepted the continuation
of the war that might have meant?

Hardly likely. In 1971, two years before any peace agreement, John Kerry, a
Vietnam veteran who became a peace activist, said that "points" presented by
Hanoi-Vietcong delegations in Paris, and their conversations with him and other
Americans, showed prisoners would be returned. So, he said, the U.S. should not
"stall" any longer.

Mr. Kerry is now a talented Senator from Massachusetts. And now he is conducting
a P.O.W. inquiry because so many Americans believe exactly what he thought could
not happen -- that the Communists kept some prisoners.

Not long after the peace agreement was signed, Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Nixon
warned that some prisoners might still be held. Did the peace movement or
Congress demand reprisal pressures against Hanoi?

Mr. Kissinger's essential role in ending the war does not wipe out the Senate's
duty to investigate the fate of all P.O.W.'s, but it distorts reality to forget
what happened in 1973.

Walter Isaacson, in his much-discussed biography "Kissinger," is often sharply
critical of his subject. But he puts criticism of the peace negotiations in this
perspective:

"By the beginning of 1973, Kissinger and Nixon had brought the nation's military
misadventure in Vietnam to an end. Instead of slinking away as the Vietnamese
factions continued the war, Kissinger had secured a cease-fire that, at least
for the moment, curtailed the killing. In addition, America's ally had been
given a decent chance to survive.

"Officials in the previous two Administrations, many of whom became preening
doves as soon as their responsibility ended, had overseen a foolish deployment
of close to 550,000 American troops over eight years. The Nixon Administration
immediately reversed the process and began withdrawing. . . .

"The Paris agreement was the final element of a reshaped American foreign policy
that -- rather amazingly -- provided the nation with the chance to play as
influential a role in the world as it had before the paralyzing despair of its
Vietnam involvement."

Senator Kerry can serve America by a full and fair inquiry. That opportunity
will be lost if the investigation is influenced by any vendetta against Mr.
Kissinger. The country deserves better. So does Henry Kissinger.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

After War, Vietnam Deported Americans

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 343 words


To the Editor:

Once again the Vietnam War has spilled into our newspapers and into our
consciousness. We are again debating whether Americans missing in action might
have been left behind in Vietnam.

As someone who spent five years in humanitarian service in Vietnam during the
war and who has visited that country several times in recent years, I also
search for truths to guide us through this anguished history.

I visited Vietnam in 1985 and again in 1989 in connection with the Mennonite
Central Committee's agricultural and medical assistance programs there. I have
had opportunity to confer with Vietnamese Government officials and, more
important, to visit privately with many Vietnamese who were intimate friends
before the fall of Saigon in 1975.

American friends have often asked me whether I believe American M.I.A.'s still
remain in Vietnam. My response: We cannot know for certain, but I doubt it. Why
do I feel that way?

Of the handful of Americans who, like me, chose to stay or failed to get out of
South Vietnam at the time of the Communist takeover in 1975, I know of no
attempt by the revolutionary Government to keep Americans in Vietnam. Rather,
the policy I encountered consistently from the low-level fighters to the highest
revolutionary officials was to register those remaining Americans and deport
them within months of the takeover.

During my more recent visits, close Vietnamese friends have sometimes been
extremely critical of the Communist Government in private. I have had people
tell me they knew of places where Americans, killed during the war, were buried.
Never, however, did any of them even suggest that they believed live Americans
were being held today in Vietnam.

That, of course, proves nothing. But given the well-established grapevine and
rumor-mill communication in the country, the lack of such reports among the
Vietnamese public makes me doubt that Americans remain against their will.

EARL MARTIN
Co-secretary for East Asia
Mennonite Central Committee
Akron, Pa., Sept. 23, 1992

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Niagara Crash Of 2 Copters Kills 4 People

BYLINE: By JAMES DAO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y., Sept. 29


As hundreds of stunned tourists looked on, two sightseeing helicopters collided
over Niagara Falls this afternoon, causing one to plummet into a wooded
hillside, where it crashed, killing all four people on board.

The collision, which occurred on the Canadian side of the falls shortly after
noon, rained metallic debris onto a parking lot filled with cars and a nearby
restaurant on the edge of the Horseshoe Falls. No one was injured by the falling
pieces, but sightseers who were picnicking, strolling or gazing at the mists of
the falls did not know whether to gape at the spectacle overhead or run for
cover.

The Canadian authorities said they could not comment on the cause of the
collision, which involved a helicopter owned by an American company and one
owned by a Canadian company. But witnesses said they saw the main rotor of the
American-owned helicopter sheared off by the landing gear of the larger,
Candian-owned aircraft.

Struck Landing Gear

Robin Talbot, a tour-group leader from Montreal, said he was standing along the
ridge above the crash site when he saw the red, American-owned helicopter rise
rapidly and strike the landing gear of the other aircraft. "It seems to me he
didn't see the other copter," Mr. Talbot said.

"His top propeller hit just near the right side door. Then the propeller just
went flying off. He had no more control. He went forward a little and dived,
nose first."

The second craft limped to the parking lot of a nearby tourist attraction, where
it was able to land. Its pilot and its four passengers survived, but the pilot
was slightly injured, Canadian officials said.

The downed American craft, carrying a pilot and three passengers, fell on an
embankment where a cable car ferries tourists up a hillside to an observation
point. The cable ride closed for the season after Labor Day, and officials said
that if it had been in operation, more than 100 people could have been killed
when the helicopter crashed.

Under portable lights tonight, investigators combed the hillside around the
crash for clues. The red helicopter lay nose down at the bottom of the steep
wooded ridge. Its tail section was sheared off and pieces of the twisted craft
were spread out over a half-mile area on the embankment.

"I heard a bang, like a shotgun," said Robert Benoit, a 46-year-old tour-bus
driver from Montreal, recalling the crash. "I saw the red copter going down,
nose first. The other was drifting off to the left.

"It was shocking," said Mr. Benoit. "You see that many times in Vietnam movies,
but when it happens, you can't believe it."

Victims of Crash

The passengers killed in the helicopter that crashed were a man and two women
who were not immediately identified. Their pilot was identified by The
Associated Press as Ben Poprawski, 43 years old, of Kendall, N.Y. The bodies
were removed from the site late tonight. The helicopter, a Hughes 500 that
carries four, belonged to Rainbow Helicopters of Niagara Falls, N.Y., while the
other craft was a Bell 206 Jet Ranger owned by Niagara Helicopters Ltd. of
Niagara Falls, Ont.

An owner of the Canadian company praised her pilot, Rudolfo De Castro, for
bringing down his damaged craft safely in the parking lot of a theme park. "He
handles himself very, very well," said the owner, Ev McTaggart. "He was flying a
damaged aircraft. Everybody walked away from it."

The helicopter's landing gear was crushed beneath it. Its right front windshield
was smashed and its right door was dangling from one hinge.

The Canadian police said the two helicopters were hovering just above the falls
behind the Table Rock restaurant, a popular sightseeing spot. Bill S. Bowie, an
inspector with the Niagara Regional Police Force in Canada, said that after the
American-owned helicopter fell through the air, the second helicopter labored to
the parking lot of Marineland and Game Farm, a theme park about three-quarters
of a mile from Horseshoe Falls.

He said that Mr. De Castro had broken his collarbone and that three of his four
passengers were being treated at Greater Niagara General Hospital for minor
injuries.

Ms. McTaggart said that Mr. De Castro was trained to fly helicopters and flew
extensively with the Philippines Air Force. She said he had flown for her
company since the spring.

A Growing Industry

The accident came just as residents of the area had begun to lobby to control a
growing industry that offers visitors flights over the falls. The flights take
off from both sides of the falls on the United States-Canadian border.

"There are just too many of them converging on the area at one time," said Rob
Nicholson, a member of the Canadian Parliament from Niagara Falls. Two weeks
ago, Mr. Nicholson filed a bill seeking to control the helicopter companies
registered in Canada. Currently, he said, anyone with a license to carry
passengers can set up a tourist business and schedule flights over the falls
without considering other companies' schedules or flight patterns.

Mr. Nicholson said today that he had acted after hundreds of people complained
about noise and safety concerns. The number of companies offering helicopter
rides over the falls grew dramatically in the last several years, Mr. Nicholson
said, because economic problems encouraged anyone with a flying license and an
aircraft to try to cash in on the tourist business.

Ms. McTaggart said her company might have as many as three helicopters in the
air at any time and logs as many as 100 eight-minute rides each day.

Some witnesses to the crash today stood frozen as a quiet afternoon turned
tragic. "You could hear the 'woof-woof' of the rotors not being able to turn" as
the helicopter fell to the ground, a Niagara Falls resident, Michael Folemsbee.

Heavily Congested

Mr. Folemsbee said the area was heavily congested with air traffic not only from
the tourist helicopter companies but also from major airports and a military
base in the area. The air space above the falls, he said, "is like a major
highway at rush hour."

Bobby Moss, a tourist from Atlanta, was one of the first people to reach the
wreckage of the helicopter that plunged down an embankment on the side of the
falls. Mr. Moss described the wreck as "just a twisted mess with a hand and a
foot coming out of it."

Niagara Falls has been the site of previous aviation accidents. On May 30, 1989,
a tourist helicopter much like the ones that collided today crash-landed on a
nearby golf course without injuring any passengers.

In 1985, 22,000 people watched as two planes from the Navy's precision flying
team, the Blue Angels, hit each other during a manuever. One of the pilots was
killed; the other ejected to safety.


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Wreckage of a helicopter that crashed on the Canadian side of
Niagara Falls, killing four, being examined by fire officials. (Associated
Press) (pg. B1); D. Paul Allore of Canada's Transportation Safety Board, at top,
climbed atop the helicopter that crashed near Niagara Falls. (Associated Press)
(pg. B6)

Chart/Photo/Map: "Collision: Deadly Impact"

Two sightseeing helicopters collided over Niagara Falls yesterday, killing four
people.

1. The landing gear of one helicopter appeared to have sheared off the main
rotor of another, sending it crashing into a hillside above the falls.

2. The helicopter that crashed slid down an embankment about 300 yards from the
Horseshoe Falls. The Niagara County Coroner said the crash killed all aboard:
two women and two men.

3. Damaged but able to fly, the other helicopter landed in a parking lot at the
Marineland theme park. Owners of that helicopter said its pilot was slightly
injured.

Map of Niagara Falls

Photo showing the location of the crash site. (pg. B6)


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 332 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
It's Not the Last Word, but It's Firsthand and Fast

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1017 words


It Doesn't Take a Hero
By Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, written with Peter Petre.
Illustrated. 530 pages. Linda Grey/Bantam Books. $25.

Ulysses S. Grant's "Personal Memoirs" were written 20 years after the Civil War.
Dwight D. Eisenhower's "Crusade in Europe" was published four years after D-day
marked the beginning of the end of World War II. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf's
autobiography, "It Doesn't Take a Hero," now appears a few moments (well, about
a year and a half) after the cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war, which still has
loose ends, including the same dictatorial leadership in Iraq. Considering the
haste of General Schwarzkopf's book (written with the acknowledged help of Peter
Petre of Fortune magazine), it's a remarkably smooth job, with excellent
battlefield maps.

General Schwarzkopf cites Grant's two-volume work as his model, calling it the
finest military history of the Civil War. He says he decided to write a full
autobiography, not just the story of the Persian Gulf war, because his
experiences in Vietnam taught him there was nothing wrong with being emotional
when dealing with the loss of life. He appears not simply as a CNN charmer but
also as an ambitious, talented and dedicated military man, a leader who saluted
loyally (as the well-chosen cover photograph shows) but seldom questioned
Washington's policies while earning his stars.

By contrast, General Grant considered the United States war against Mexico, in
which he served, "one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a
weaker nation." Of the Civil War, General Grant wrote, "This war was a fearful
lesson, and should teach us the necessity of avoiding wars in the future." No
such antiwar statements can be found in General Schwarzkopf's autobiography
about any of the three conflicts in which he played increasingly important
roles: the Vietnam War, the Grenada invasion and, of course, the Persian Gulf
war.

How does "It Doesn't Take a Hero" stack up as war literature?

Roughly the first half of the book, which is mainly personal, is stretched-out
and routine. As a young man, the future general follows in the footsteps of his
father, a West Point graduate and veteran of both World Wars. He learns
tolerance from his mother, a fact that is of immeasurable help in his later
dealings with soldiers and military allies.

Since General Schwarzkopf, as an author, sounds cautiously apolitical in 1992,
it's surprising to read of his early years, "I was a liberal and an admirer of
President Kennedy, and Barry Goldwater made me uneasy when he blustered about
rolling back the clock on civil rights and challenging the Soviet Union to war."

"It Doesn't Take a Hero" begins to pick up steam when Lieutenant Colonel
Schwarzkopf commands a battalion in Vietnam. Under fire, he rescues a soldier in
a minefield and is himself wounded by shrapnel. In one of the admirable
character revelations in the book, three black soldiers come up to him in the
hospital and one says: "Colonel, we saw what you did for the brother out there.
We'll never forget that, and we'll make sure that all the other brothers in the
battalion know what you did." He comments: "I was stunned. It hadn't registered
on me until that moment that the kid in the minefield was black."

General Schwarzkopf shows himself to be a product of the Vietnam War experience.
He is angered by antiwar protesters, including Vietnam veterans and one of his
own sisters. Unlike such World War II leaders as Gens. Dwight D. Eisenhower and
Omar N. Bradley, he doesn't take members of the American press into his
confidence. As deputy commander in Grenada, General Schwarzkopf shows his
agility by successfully revising a battle plan on the scene. He admits to
misgivings about sending troops to Grenada but only because he fears that the
American public might not support them. Of one thing he is certain: he doesn't
want reporters around during a military operation.

Moving to a much wider stage for the Persian Gulf war, General Schwarzkopf
insists that he and those above him were in harmony, even on the cease-fire
order that ended hostilities and left Saddam Hussein in power. Indeed, referring
to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as well as President Bush, General Schwarzkopf
writes: "I respect and admire the President, Cheney and Powell, and we ended up
in unanimous agreement on every major issue."

This diplomatic statement is not always borne out by the accounts in his book.
While General Schwarzkopf felt that Mr. Bush supported him and didn't interfere
with his tactical planning, he has this to say about Mr. Cheney: "But now I
wondered whether Cheney had succumbed to the phenomenon I'd observed among some
secretaries of the Army: put a civilian in charge of professional military men
and before long he's no longer satisfied with setting policy but wants to
outgeneral the generals."

The arguments between Generals Powell and Schwarzkopf sound different, in
General Schwarzkopf's telling. Both are under pressure, General Schwarzkopf to
keep his allied coalition together, General Powell from the President, the
Pentagon and public opinion. While General Schwarzkopf admits that General
Powell is more politically connected and astute, as Vietnam combat veterans they
respect each other. Their arguments are more about tactics than policies. "At
bottom, neither Powell nor I wanted a ground war," he writes. "We agreed that if
the United States could get a rapid withdrawal we would urge our leaders to take
it. Though we hadn't literally defeated Saddam on the battlefield, in the eyes
of the world -- including the Arab world -- under the circumstances a rapid
withdrawal would be a defeat for Iraq. And we'd have accomplished it without any
additional loss of life on our side."

As war literature, "It Doesn't Take a Hero" is a first draft of history, a
serviceable but incomplete story of a complex coalition war. In his book,
General Schwarzkopf comes across as a strong professional soldier, a Patton with
a conscience.

NAME: H. Norman Schwarzkopf

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf (Craig Blankenhorn/CBS)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
